
10-K
1
a09-34257_110k.htm
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 AND 15(D)


Table
of Contents
 

 

 
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON,
D.C.  20549
 
FORM 10-K
 
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
 
FOR THE
FISCAL YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 27, 2009
 
COMMISSION
FILE NUMBER:  0-19797
 
WHOLE
FOODS MARKET, INC.
(Exact name of
registrant as specified in its charter)
 




Texas


 


74-1989366




(State of
  incorporation)


 


(IRS Employer
  Identification No.)




 
550 Bowie
St.
Austin, Texas 
78703
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
Registrant’s
telephone number, including area code:
512-477-4455
 
Securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the Act:
Common
Stock, no par value
 
Indicate by check mark if
the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of
the Securities Act.
Yes x  No o
 
Indicate by check mark if
the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of
the Act.
Yes o  No x
 
Indicate by check mark
whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13
or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file
such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days. Yes x  No
o
 
Indicate by check mark
whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate
Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and
posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding
12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to
submit and post such files). Yes o  No o
 
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent
filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will
not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K
or any amendment to this Form 10-K. o
 
Indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company (as defined in Rule 12b-2
of the Exchange Act).
 




 


Large accelerated filer
  x


 


Accelerated filer o




 


Non-accelerated filer o (Do not check if a smaller reporting
  company)  


 


Smaller reporting
  company o




 
Indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act). Yes o  No
x
 
The aggregate market value of all common stock held by
non-affiliates of the registrant as of April 12, 2009 was
$2,547,293,463.  The number of shares of
the registrant’s common stock, no par value, outstanding as of November 20,
2009 was 140,641,517.
 
DOCUMENTS
INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
 
The information required by Part III of this
report, to the extent not set forth herein, is incorporated by reference from
the Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of the
Stockholders to be held March 8, 2010.
 

 

 





Table
of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Annual Report on Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended September 27,
2009
 
Table
of Contents
 



 


 


 


 


Page




 


 


 


 


Number




 


 


 


 


 




PART I




 


 


 


 


 




Item 1.


 


Business


 


3




Item 1A.


 


Risk Factors


 


16




Item 1B.


 


Unresolved Staff
  Comments


 


20




Item 2.


 


Properties


 


20




Item 3.


 


Legal Proceedings


 


21




Item 4.


 


Submission of
  Matters to a Vote of Security Holders


 


21




 


 


 


 


 




PART II




 


 


 


 


 




Item 5. 


 


Market for
  Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases
  of Equity Securities


 


22




Item 6.


 


Selected Financial
  Data


 


24




Item 7.


 


Management’s
  Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations


 


25




Item 7A.


 


Quantitative
  and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk


 


35




Item 8.


 


Financial
  Statements and Supplementary Data


 


37




Item 9.


 


Changes in and
  Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure


 


68




Item 9A.


 


Controls and
  Procedures


 


68




Item 9B.


 


Other Information


 


68




 


 


 


 


 




PART III




 


 


 


 


 




Item 10.


 


Directors and
  Executive Officers of the Registrant


 


69




Item 11.


 


Executive
  Compensation


 


69




Item 12.


 


Security
  Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management


 


69




Item 13.


 


Certain
  Relationships and Related Transactions


 


69




Item 14.


 


Principal Accounting
  Fees and Services


 


69




 


 


 


 


 




PART IV




 


 


 


 


 




Item 15.


 


Exhibits,
  Financial Statement Schedules


 


70




 


 


 


 


 




SIGNATURES


 


72



 
2





Table of Contents
 
This Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking
statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities and
Exchange Act of 1934 concerning our current expectations, assumptions,
estimates and projections about the future. These forward-looking statements
are based on currently available operating, financial and competitive
information and are subject to
risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ
materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements. See “Item
1A. Risk Factors” for a discussion of risks and uncertainties that may affect
our business.
 
PART I
 
Item 1.      Business.
 
General
 
Whole Foods Market is the
world’s leading natural and organic foods supermarket and America’s first
national “Certified Organic” grocer. Our Company mission is to promote the
vitality and well-being of all individuals by supplying the highest quality,
most wholesome foods available. Since the purity of our food and the health of
our bodies are directly related to the purity and health of our environment,
our core mission is devoted to the promotion of organically grown foods, food
safety concerns, and the sustainability of our entire ecosystem. Through our
growth, we have had a significant and positive impact on the natural and
organic foods movement throughout the United States, helping lead the industry
to nationwide acceptance over the last 29 years.
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
is a Texas corporation incorporated in 1980. The Company is based in Austin,
Texas and conducts business through various wholly owned subsidiaries. Unless
otherwise specified, references to Whole Foods Market or the Company in this
Report include its consolidated subsidiaries. We have one operating segment,
natural and organic foods supermarkets.
 
We opened our first store
in Austin, Texas in 1980 and completed our initial public offering in January 1992.
As of September 27, 2009, we operated 284 stores: 273 stores in 38 U.S.
states and the District of Columbia; six stores in Canada; and five stores in
the United Kingdom.
 
Our sales have grown
rapidly through new store openings, acquisitions and comparable store sales
growth, from approximately $92 million in fiscal year 1991, excluding the
effect of pooling-of-interests transactions completed since 1991, to
approximately $8.0 billion in fiscal year 2009, a compounded annual growth rate
of approximately 28%. We are a Fortune 500 company, ranking number 324 on the
2009 list. Our 284 stores average approximately 37,000 square feet in size,
approximately $29 million in annual sales, and are approximately nine years old
on average. Our stores are supported by 12 regional offices and our Austin
headquarters, regional distribution centers, bakehouse facilities, commissary
kitchens, seafood-processing facilities, meat and produce procurement centers,
and a specialty coffee, tea procurement and brewing operation.
 
We aspire to become an
international brand synonymous with not just natural and organic foods, but
also with being the best food retailer in every community in which we are
located. We believe our heavy emphasis on perishables and locally grown
products, along with our unparalleled customer service, is helping us reach that
goal, differentiating our stores from other supermarkets and enabling us to
attract a broad base of loyal customers.
 
The following is a
summary of annual percentage sales and net long-lived assets by geographic
area:
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Sales:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




United
  States


 


97.2


%


96.5


%


97.3


%




Canada
  and United Kingdom


 


2.8


%


3.5


%


2.7


%




Total
  sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%




Long-lived
  assets, net:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




United
  States


 


96.5


%


96.4


%


95.1


%




Canada
  and United Kingdom


 


3.5


%


3.6


%


4.9


%




Total long-lived assets, net


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
The Natural and Organic Products
Industry
 
According to a leading
trade publication for the industry, sales of natural products across all retail
and direct-to-consumer channels grew to approximately $68 billion in 2008, a
10% increase over the prior year.
 
3





Table of Contents
 
We believe the growth in
sales of natural and organic foods is being driven by numerous factors,
including:
 
·                  heightened awareness of the role that
food and nutrition play in long-term health, which has led to healthier eating
patterns;
·                  a better-educated and wealthier populace
whose median age is increasing each year;
·                  increasing consumer concern over the purity
and safety of food due to the presence of pesticide residues, growth hormones,
artificial ingredients and other chemicals, and genetically engineered
ingredients; and
·                  environmental concerns due to the
degradation of water and soil quality.
 
Natural foods can be
defined as foods that are minimally processed, largely or completely free of
artificial ingredients, preservatives and other non-naturally occurring
chemicals and as near to their whole, natural state as possible. Organic foods
are grown through methods intended to support and enhance the earth’s natural
balance. Generally, organic food products are produced using:
 
·                  agricultural management practices
intended to promote and enhance ecosystem health;
·                  no genetically engineered seeds or crops,
sewage sludge, long-lasting pesticides, herbicides or fungicides;
·                  livestock management practices intended
to promote healthy, humanely treated animals by providing organically grown
feed, fresh air and outdoor access while using no antibiotics or growth
hormones; and
·                  food processing practices intended to
protect the integrity of the organic product and disallow irradiation, genetically
modified organisms (“GMOs”) or synthetic preservatives.
 
Organic Rule
 
In October 2002, the
United States Department of Agriculture’s (“USDA”) Organic Rule was
implemented into Federal law. The Organic Rule was created to address the
rapid, consistent growth of the organics industry over the past 20-plus years
and the need for a set of national organic standards to serve as clear
guidelines as to what is considered organic for the industry and its customers.
Under the Organic Rule, all products labeled as “organic” in any form must be
certified by a USDA-accredited certifying agency. Furthermore, all retailers,
including Whole Foods Market, that handle, store, and sell organic products
must implement measures to protect their organic integrity by:
 
·                  preventing the commingling of organic and conventional
products;
·                  protecting organic products from contact with
prohibited substances (such as sanitation and pest control products);
·                  labeling organic products properly and clearly; and
·                  keeping proper records with regard to organic handling
procedures and vendor relationships.
 
Whole Foods Market played
an active leadership role in the development of the national organic standards.
Margaret Wittenberg, our Global Vice President of Quality Standards and Public
Affairs, served on the National Organic Standards Board (“NOSB”) from 1995 to
2000. The NOSB members were appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture to act as
industry advisors to the USDA’s National Organic Program, developing the
standards and protocols that form the backbone of the USDA’s Organic Rule. As
the sole retail representative on the NOSB, Ms. Wittenberg contributed a
broad, realistic perspective on how the standards could work most effectively
at the retail level.
 
In fiscal year 2009, U.S.
Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack appointed Joe Dickson, our Food, Organic and
Environmental Quality Standards Coordinator, to serve as one of five new board
members on the National Organic Standards Board from 2010 through 2015.
 
Whole Foods Market has
been devoted to protecting organic integrity for years, and we are pleased to
have the USDA’s Organic Rule as a guiding standard. In May 2003,
Whole Foods Market became America’s first national “Certified Organic” grocer
through certification by a federally recognized independent third-party
certification organization. In July 2009, California Certified Organic
Growers (“CCOF”), one of the oldest and largest USDA-accredited third-party
organic certifiers, individually certified each of our stores in the U.S.,
complying with stricter guidance on federal regulations. This voluntary
certification tells our customers that we have gone the extra mile by not only
following the USDA’s Organic Rule, but opening our stores up to third-party
inspectors and following a strict set of operating procedures designed to
ensure that the products we sell and label as organic are indeed organic —
procedures that are not specifically required by the Organic Rule.
 
This certification
verifies our handling of organic goods according to stringent national
guidelines, from receipt through re-packing to final sale to customers. To
receive certification, retailers must agree to adhere to a strict set of
standards set forth by the USDA, submit documentation, and open their facilities
to on-site inspections — all designed to assure Americans that the chain of
organic integrity is preserved. The certification is one more example of our
commitment to the promotion of organic agriculture and the integrity of the
certified organic label.
 
4





Table
of Contents
 
Business Strategy
 
Whole Foods Market is the
world’s leading natural and organic foods supermarket. We believe that much of
our success to date is because we remain a uniquely mission-driven Company. We
are highly selective about what we sell. We believe in providing an empowering
work environment for our team members, and we are committed to sustainable
agriculture. Our motto, “Whole Foods, Whole People, Whole Planet,” emphasizes
that our vision reaches far beyond just food retailing.
 
Whole Foods
 
We obtain our products
locally and from all over the world, often from small, uniquely dedicated food
artisans. We strive to offer the highest quality, least processed, most
flavorful and naturally preserved foods. We believe that food in its purest
state, unadulterated by artificial additives, sweeteners, colorings and
preservatives, is the best tasting and most nutritious food available.
 
Whole People
 
We recruit the best
people we can to become part of our team. We empower them to make many
operational decisions, creating a respectful workplace where team members are
treated fairly and are highly motivated to succeed. We look for team members
who are passionate about food, but also well-rounded human beings who can play
a critical role in helping to build our Company into a profitable and
beneficial part of every community we serve.
 
Whole Planet
 
We believe companies, like
individuals, must assume their share of responsibility for our planet. We
actively support organic farming on a global basis because we believe it is the
best method for promoting sustainable agriculture and protecting the
environment and farm workers. We also assist our global neighbors through our
Whole Planet Foundation’s microlending operations. On a local basis, we are
actively involved in our communities by supporting food banks, sponsoring
neighborhood events, and contributing at least 5% of our after-tax profits in
the form of cash or products to not-for-profit organizations.
 
Core
Values
 
Our
core values reflect what is truly important to us as an organization. They are
the underpinning of our corporate culture and the soul of our Company. They transcend
our size and growth, so regardless of how large we become, by maintaining our
core values we are able to preserve what has always been special about our
Company. In 2009, we added a seventh core value recognizing the important role
we play in promoting the health of our stakeholders.
 
Our
core values are:
 
·                  selling the highest quality natural and
organic products available;
·                  satisfying and delighting our customers;
·                  supporting team member happiness and
excellence;
·                  creating wealth through profits and
growth;
·                  caring about our communities and our
environment;
·                  creating ongoing win-win partnerships
with our suppliers; and
·                  promoting the health of our stakeholders
through healthy eating education.
 
These
core values speak to our belief in a balanced way of doing business. They very
succinctly express the purpose of our business, which is not only to make
profits, but to create value for all of our major stakeholders — our customers,
team members, suppliers, investors, and the community and environment. All are
linked interdependently.
 
Whole
Planet Foundation®
 
As an extension of our core value to care about our
communities and environment, we created the Whole Planet Foundation in 2005, an
independent, non-profit organization whose mission is to empower the poor
through microcredit, with a focus on the developing-world communities that
supply our stores with product. Microcredit is a system pioneered by Professor
Muhammad Yunus, founder of the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh and co-recipient of
the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize. The philosophy behind microcredit is to provide the
poor access to credit without requiring contracts or collateral, enabling them
to lift themselves out of poverty by creating or expanding home-based
businesses. Whole Planet Foundation has partnered with various microfinance
institutions to support microlending programs in communities where the Company
sources products.
 
As of September 27, 2009, the Whole Planet
Foundation had committed over $10 million in grants to 16 microlending projects.
These projects are in Argentina, where Whole Foods Market sources blueberries;
Bolivia, where we buy cacao; Costa Rica and Honduras, where we source bananas;
Guatemala, Nicaragua, Indonesia, East Timor, Ethiopia and Kenya, where we have
relationships with coffee farmers; Haiti, where we source mangoes; India, where
we buy spices and cashews; 
 
5





Table
of Contents
 
Nepal, where we source tea; Peru, where we buy onions;
Thailand, where we buy rice; and the United States, where we buy produce and
dairy.
 
Together with customers, vendors
and team members, Whole Foods Market and Whole Planet Foundation have funded microlending
projects for over 47,600 women and their families to date. It is estimated that
each woman supports a family of five, which means our support is indirectly
contributing to the prosperity of approximately 238,000 individuals.
Microentrepreneurs supported by Whole Planet Foundation’s implementing partners
around the globe are utilizing the loans for home-based businesses such as
poultry and pig farming, agriculture, furniture making, tailoring, and selling
handicrafts, homemade and bakery-made foods, clothing and footwear.
 
In July 2009, Whole Foods
Market received the Natural Products Association’s “2009 Socially Responsible
Retailer Award” for excellence in integrating social responsibility into
multiple aspects of business. While there were several determining factors for
selection, the work of our Whole Planet Foundation was the primary reason that
Whole Foods Market was chosen for the award.
 
Today, more than one
billion people are living on less than $1 a day. Whole Foods Market covers all
operating costs and the overhead budget for Whole Planet Foundation, funded in
part by the sale of products under the Company’s Whole Trade Guarantee program.
Join us in empowering entrepreneurs in the global community by donating online
at www.wholeplanetfoundation.org. We have included
the foundation’s website address only as an inactive textual reference. The
information contained on the website is not incorporated by reference into this
Report on Form 10-K.
 
Green Action
 
Supporting wise
environmental practices is part of our core values and strengthens our
commitment to being a leader in environmental stewardship. Our Green Mission
Task Force, comprised of team members and leadership across the Company, is
empowered to act on initiatives that support our Green Mission, including best
practices and Company-wide intentions for energy efficiency, green building,
and waste stream reductions. In 2009, we were honored to receive a 2009 Green
Choice Award from Natural Health magazine for our commitment to
substantial, earth-friendly initiatives that inspire others to follow suit.
 
Renewable Energy. Whole
Foods Market uses a comprehensive alternative energy approach to reduce its
reliance on fossil fuels. Over the years, we have purchased approximately 2.0
million megawatt hours of wind-based renewable energy. Our commitment to
renewable energy purchasing earned us Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”)
Green Power awards from 2005 through 2008. We now have close to 20 locations
either hosting or using solar power to supplement traditional power, with
future rollout plans to include up to 70 locations. We also have hydrogen fuel
cells on-site at two stores in Glastonbury, CT and Dedham, MA.
 
Energy Reduction and Efficiency. Whole Foods Market has installed energy
monitoring equipment to identify system reduction opportunities, and retrofit
existing stores with more energy efficient lighting, equipment, and mechanical
components. The Company is also upgrading its equipment and systems to improve
energy efficiency in new stores, efforts that may reduce energy consumption by
10 percent to 50 percent in certain stores. In addition, the recent
implementation of a Company-wide energy and refrigerant tracking program is
enabling us to develop a greenhouse gas emissions inventory.
 
Green
Construction. We build our new stores with the environment in mind, using green
building innovations whenever possible. Five of our stores have received
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (“LEED”) certification by the
U.S. Green Building Council, including our South Loop store in Chicago which
earned LEED Gold certification. In addition, we are working with the Green
Building Initiative’s Green Globes Program, which has been equated to LEED but
with more emphasis on energy efficiency. Two of our stores earned Green Globes
this year, including our new Dedham, MA store which earned three Green Globes
(equivalent to LEED Gold). We have approximately 20 stores registered to become
LEED-certified and more under development.
 
Encouraging
Reusable Grocery Bags. Whole Foods Market discontinued the
use of disposable plastic grocery bags at the checkouts in all stores in the
U.S., Canada and the United Kingdom on Earth Day, April 22, 2008. We
strongly encourage our customers to use reusable grocery bags by providing
affordable bags, including our $0.99 A Better Bag
made from recycled plastic bottles, and by paying at least a nickel per bag
refund at the checkout.
 
Composting
and Recycling.
Nearly all of our stores are involved in a recycling program, and most participate
in a composting program where food waste and compostable paper goods are
regenerated into compost. Additionally, in 2007, we introduced all-natural
fiber packaging in many of our prepared foods departments that is a
compostable, environmentally friendly alternative to traditional petroleum and
wood- or tree-based materials. Its fibers come from plants that are cultivated
or grow 
 
6





Table
of Contents
 
wild
and are harvested annually. We are also working to eliminate the use of
Styrofoam packing materials in product shipments to our Company.
 
Healthy
Eating Education
 
Whole
Foods Market has renewed and expanded its intention to educate customers and
team members about healthy eating choices with the introduction of a seventh
core value in fiscal year 2009. Our new Global Healthy Eating Education Team is
in place, and we began the process of piloting this new education program across
our regions and stores this past summer. The program includes, among other
things: in-store Healthy Eating centers to display books and answer questions
about healthy eating and cooking ideas; store tours focused on making healthy
eating choices; and a wide variety of educational opportunities for team
members, along with healthy eating classes and networking opportunities for our
customers. We believe our healthy eating education program will be a key
differentiator for Whole Foods Market, helping to promote the health,
well-being and longevity of our customers and team members for years to come.
 
In November 2008,
Health magazine named Whole Foods Market
“America’s Healthiest Grocery Store” based on a survey of six prominent health
experts. In August 2009, we launched a new partnership with Chef Ann
Cooper, the nation’s “Renegade Lunch Lady,” to transform lunch in schools
across the country through the “School Lunch Revolution” campaign. Supported in
part by a donation from Whole Foods Market and a donation drive at check-out
stands in our stores, this national effort is designed to help schools bring
about real change in the way children eat. In supporting Chef Cooper’s free,
first-of-a-kind Lunch Box website — thelunchbox.org — our goal is to raise
awareness, engage our shoppers, and give schools easy access to the tools they
need to serve fresher, healthier meals.
 
Products
 
We offer a broad and
differentiated product selection with a strong emphasis on perishable foods
designed to appeal to all shoppers. Most of our products are from natural and
organic food vendors; however, we do sell certain conventional national brands
that meet our quality standards. Due to seasonality, the Company’s gross profit
is typically lower in the first fiscal quarter due to the product mix of
holiday sales, and in the summer months through September during which we
have historically experienced lower average weekly sales. The following is a
summary of annual percentage sales by product category:
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Grocery


 


33.8


%


33.2


%


32.0


%




Prepared
  foods


 


19.1


%


19.3


%


19.8


%




Other
  perishables


 


47.1


%


47.5


%


48.3


%




Total
  sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
Figures may not sum due to rounding.
 
Product Selection
 
Our
product selection includes, but is not limited to: produce, seafood, grocery,
meat and poultry, bakery, prepared foods and catering, specialty (beer, wine
and cheese), coffee and tea, nutritional supplements, vitamins, body care and
educational products such as books, floral, pet products and household products.
 
We believe our heavy
emphasis on perishable products differentiates us from other supermarkets and
helps us attract a broader customer base. We believe that all shoppers, not
just natural and organic food shoppers, appreciate great produce, dairy, meat
and poultry, seafood, bakery and prepared foods. We believe it is our strength
of execution in perishables that has attracted many of our most loyal
customers.
 
Quality
Standards
 
An integral part
of our Company mission is to promote the vitality and well-being of all
individuals by supplying the highest quality, most wholesome foods available.
We evaluate quality in terms of nutrition, freshness, appearance and taste. Our
search for quality is a never-ending process involving the careful judgment of
buyers throughout the Company.
 
·                  We carefully evaluate each and every
product that we sell.
·                  We feature foods that are free of
artificial preservatives, colors, flavors, sweeteners and hydrogenated fats.
·                  We are passionate about great tasting
food and the pleasure of sharing it with others.
·                  We are committed to foods that are fresh,
wholesome and safe to eat.
·                  We seek out and promote organically grown
foods.
·                  We provide food and nutritional products
that support health and well-being.
 
7





Table
of Contents
 
Our work over the past
year has included a focus on enhancing our quality standards for wild-caught
seafood. For the past decade we have had a solid foundation for sourcing
sustainable seafood through our partnership with the Marine Stewardship Council
(“MSC”). The MSC is a global, independent, non-profit fishery certification
organization that rewards sustainable fishing practices to ensure healthier
marine environments and abundant fish stocks for future generations. We are
proud to have been the first U.S. retailer to offer MSC-certified seafood,
which displays the MSC label to indicate the seafood is sourced from
responsible, well-managed fisheries. In addition to continually expanding the
varieties of MSC-certified seafood we offer in our stores, we also stopped
selling several seafood species that are considered by a consensus of seafood
experts to be depleted in the oceans.
 
For farmed seafood, our
quality standards always prohibited the use of antibiotics, added growth
hormones, preservatives and genetic modification or cloning. In fiscal year
2008, we launched a comprehensive set of enhanced farmed seafood standards.
Now, all of our farmed finfish and shrimp suppliers have passed third-party
audits to ensure they meet our stringent quality standards, which were extended
to include:
 
·                  farm-to-fork traceability from the
hatcheries to the ponds, pens, raceways or tanks where the seafood is raised
and to the plants where it is processed;
·                  requirements that producers minimize the
impact of fish farming on the environment by protecting sensitive habitats such
as mangrove forests and wetlands, monitoring water quality to prevent
pollution, and sourcing feed ingredients responsibly;
·                  the prohibition of toxic chemicals such
as malachite green and organophosphate; and
·                  requirements that producers provide
detailed information on their farming practices and pass independent
third-party audits.
 
Animal
Welfare Standards
 
In fiscal year 2009, Whole Foods Market was ranked the “most humane
grocery store” in a survey conducted by the World Society for the Protection of
Animals, scoring highest among the top 25 largest supermarkets in the United
States for the number of humanely labeled food products on its shelves.
 
We are dedicated to
promoting animal welfare on farms and ranches that raise animals for meat
production. Our minimum standards, which apply to all meat and poultry we sell
in our stores, ensure the animals are:
 
·                  raised without antibiotics;
·                  raised without added growth hormones in
any species, far beyond the federal regulations that prohibit added growth
hormones in poultry, pigs, veal or bison;
·                  never fed animal byproducts;
·                  range or pasture-raised for at least
two-thirds of their lives (for ruminants); and
·                  never tethered or kept in crates (for
pigs or veal calves).
 
Whole Foods Market
is strongly committed to helping create alternatives to the “factory farm”
methods of raising livestock. We have encouraged innovative animal production
practices to improve the quality and safety of the meat and poultry sold in our
stores, while also supporting humane living conditions for the animals. For
this reason, we refuse to sell commercial veal from tethered calves, foie gras
from force-fed ducks, and eggs from caged hens.
 
In December 2003,
we started working through a consultative multi-stakeholder process to develop “Animal
Compassionate” standards, farm animal treatment standards that go above and
beyond our baseline requirements for the meat and poultry sold in our
stores, focused on providing environments and conditions for each species
that support the animal’s natural physical, emotional and behavioral
well-being. In 2006, that work was then used as a basis for creating meat and
poultry production standards categorized according to a framework for
continuous improvement of animal welfare on farms and ranches and to provide
our customers with a clear and transparent way to make informed buying
decisions based solely on animal welfare considerations. In June 2007, we
piloted a five-tiered meat and poultry labeling program at our Kensington store
in London based on this framework. Further standards development and
implementation of the 5-Step Animal Welfare Rating system was transitioned to
the Global Animal Partnership foundation when it was founded in the spring of
2008. In early 2009, Whole Foods Market began implementing a pilot project for
the Global Animal Partnership foundation to test the implementation of the
5-Step Animal Welfare Rating system, beginning with our stores in the South
Region, before the foundation extends the program to other retailers.
 
Locally
Grown
 
Our history and
reputation are intimately linked to our support of local farmers. For more than
29 years, we have provided our customers with the broadest possible selection
of the highest quality produce available. Our search for produce begins right 
 
8





Table
of Contents
 
outside our front door in
every community where we do business. We are committed to buying from local
producers whose products meet our high quality standards, particularly those
who are dedicated to environmentally friendly, sustainable agriculture. We are
greatly increasing our efforts in this regard by further empowering our individual
store and regional buyers to seek out locally grown products. We value this
natural diversity.
 
Whole Foods Market
currently purchases produce from over 2,000 different farms through various
suppliers. We believe we can and should do more to support local producers. To
that end, we have established a budget of up to $10 million to promote local
agriculture, especially animal agriculture, wherever we have stores through
long-term loans currently ranging from $1,000 to $100,000 at low interest
rates. We completed our first loan through the Local Producer Loan Program in February 2007
and so far have disbursed more than $2.7 million in loans to 45 local producers
Company-wide. Loan recipients must use funds for expansion and not operating
expenses, meet Whole Foods Market’s quality standards, and have a viable
business plan and adequate cash flow to service the debt. Eligible products
include agricultural crops, value-added food products, and other all-natural
grocery items.
 
Whole
TradeTM Guarantee
 
In March 2007, we launched our Whole Trade Guarantee
program, a buying initiative that expands our social responsibility to bring together
a set of strict criteria for products sourced from developing countries. In a
shrinking global marketplace, the Whole Trade program is a logical extension of
our values that promote quality in everything we do, from products and business
practices to caring for our team members, communities and the environment. The
products in this program must meet specific criteria in four areas of
responsibility. They must:
 
·                  meet our high quality standards;
·                  provide more money to producers;
·                  ensure better wages and working
conditions for workers; and
·                  care for the environment.
 
Products under the Whole Trade Guarantee
meeting these criteria are purchased at a price that is equal to or greater
than the internationally recognized fair trade price. For these products, Whole
Foods Market donates 1% of sales to the Whole Planet Foundation to help end
world poverty.
 
Our Whole Trade Guarantee label is
currently featured on over 1,350 items, and sales of approximately $76 million
in fiscal year 2009 generated approximately $762,000 for the Whole Planet
Foundation. This was a 72% increase from fiscal year 2008, when sales of
approximately $44 million generated approximately $442,000 for the Whole Planet
Foundation.
 
Private
Label
 
An extension of our leadership position in the natural and
organic foods industry is our strong family of private label brands. These
products extend the confidence and trust our customers have in our stores to
their everyday lives. We have built upon this trust and over the last several
years have significantly expanded our
private label resources and offerings, which currently feature approximately
2,400 SKUs led by our primary brands, 365 Everyday Value and 365 Organic. These products are designed to cover the
full spectrum of category needs: from the highest quality, value entry-point
products to super premium, unique offerings that cater to true food aficionados.
While some of our private label products yield greater margins than their
comparable brand alternative, their primary purpose is to help differentiate
our product selection and provide more value offerings to our customers.
 
In addition to these nationally-driven
programs, we have a number of store-made and regionally-made fresh items sold
under the Whole Foods Market label. We also offer specialty and
organic coffee, tea and drinking chocolates through our Allegro Coffee Company
subsidiary. In
addition, we have developed a grouping of “exclusive” and “control brand”
products to fill out our family of brands. Control brands are brands produced
exclusively for Whole Foods Market and not available to other retailers (e.g.,
Columbia River Organics). Exclusive products are either co-branded with the
national brand and Whole Foods Market brand or are a unique formulation or
attribute only available at Whole Foods Market. These products help continue to
differentiate Whole Foods Market selections across all aspects of our various
product categories. We currently offer approximately 1,300 regional and other
branded products, including Allegro Coffee products, in our stores.
 
Total private label sales across all categories accounted for
approximately 11% of our retail sales in fiscal year 2009, up from 10% of our
retail sales in fiscal year 2008. We believe our private label sales will grow
to a higher percentage of our sales over time as we continue the development
and growth of our product lines.
 
9





Table of Contents
 
Economic Value Added
 
We use Economic Value
Added (“EVA”™) as a basis for our business decisions and as a component in
determining incentive compensation. In its simplest definition, EVA is
equivalent to net operating profits after taxes minus a charge on the cost of
invested capital necessary to generate those profits. We believe one of our
core strengths is our decentralized culture, where many decisions are made at
the store level, close to the customer. We believe this is one of our strongest
competitive advantages and that EVA is the best financial framework that team
members can use to help make decisions that create sustainable shareholder
value.
 
We use EVA extensively
for capital investment decisions, including evaluating new store real estate
decisions and store remodeling proposals. We only invest in projects that we
believe will add long-term value to the Company. The EVA decision-making model
also enhances operating decisions in stores. Our emphasis is on EVA
improvement, as we want to challenge our teams to continue to innovate and grow
EVA in new ways. We believe that opportunities always exist to increase sales
and margins, to lower operating expenses and to make investments that add value
in ways that benefit all of our stakeholders. We believe that focusing on EVA
improvement encourages continuous improvement of our business.
 
Approximately 1,000
leaders throughout the Company participate in our incentive compensation plans
that incorporate EVA as a component. These plans cover our senior executive
leadership, regional leadership and the store leadership team (store team
leaders and assistant store team leaders) in all stores. A component of
incentive compensation for each of these groups is determined based on relevant
EVA measures at different levels, including the total Company level, the
regional level, the store or facility level, and the team level. We believe
using EVA in a multi-dimensional approach helps us to measure the results of
decisions made at different levels of the Company. We expect EVA to remain a
component of our compensation structure throughout the Company in the coming
years.
 
Additional information
about our EVA financial results is available on our corporate website at
www.wholefoodsmarket.com but is not incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K.
 
Growth
Strategy
 
Whole Foods Market’s
growth strategy is to expand primarily through new store openings. We have a
disciplined, opportunistic real estate strategy, opening stores in existing
trade areas as well as new areas, including international locations. Our new
stores typically are located on premium real estate sites and range in size
between 35,000 and 50,000 square feet which we believe is appropriate in most
circumstances to maximize return on invested capital and EVA, and we expect the
majority of our stores to fall within that range going forward. We have also
grown through acquisitions, with approximately 23% of our existing square
footage coming from acquisitions. Because the food retailing industry is highly
fragmented and comprised of many smaller local and regional chains, we may
continue to pursue acquisitions of smaller chains that provide access to
desirable areas, locations and experienced team members. Going forward,
however, such acquisitions are not expected to significantly impact our future
store growth or financial results due to the size of the Company’s existing
store base.
 
We have an ongoing
relocation strategy and each year relocate some of our smaller stores to larger
locations with improved visibility and parking. For the 22 stores relocated in
fiscal years 2005 through 2009, the overall average increase in size was
approximately 124%. Our historical store growth is summarized below:
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 


2005


 




Stores at beginning of fiscal year


 


275


 


276


 


186


 


175


 


163


 




Stores opened


 


15


 


20


 


21


 


13


 


15


 




Acquired stores


 


—


 


—


 


109


 


1


 


—


 




Divested stores


 


—


 


—


 


(35


)


—


 


—


 




Relocations and closures


 


(6


)


(21


)


(5


)


(3


)


(3


)




Stores at end of fiscal year


 


284


 


275


 


276


 


186


 


175


 




Remodels with major expansions(1)


 


2


 


1


 


2


 


1


 


—


 




Total gross square footage at end of fiscal year


 


10,566,000


 


9,895,000


 


9,312,000


 


6,377,000


 


5,819,000


 




Year-over-year change


 


7


%


6


%


46


%


10


%


13


%



 
(1) Defined as remodels
with expansions of square footage greater than 20% completed during the fiscal
year.
 
10





Table of Contents
 
As of November 4,
2009, we had signed leases for 53 stores scheduled to open through fiscal year
2013 totaling approximately 2.4 million square feet or an average of
approximately 45,000 square feet per store. This includes eight relocations and
seven new areas. Our historical growth in stores in development is summarized
below:
 



 


 


November 4,


 


November 5,


 


November 20,


 


November 2,


 


November 9,


 




 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 


2005


 




Stores in development


 


53


 


66


 


87


 


88


 


65


 




Average size (gross square feet)


 


45,000


 


49,000


 


51,000


 


56,000


 


55,000


 




Total gross square footage in development


 


2,410,000


 


3,294,000


 


4,485,000


 


5,003,000


 


3,626,000


 




Year-over-year change


 


-27


%


-27


%


-10


%


38


%


40


%



 
We are focused on
the right sized store for each location and, since announcing in the third
quarter of 2007 our intent to decrease the size of several leases in
development, we have downsized 14 leases by an average of 12,000 square feet
each. We also have terminated 16 leases for stores in development totaling
approximately 846,000 square feet, or an average of 53,000 square feet per
store. In addition, we are building out a smaller footprint (averaging 15,000
square feet each) at seven locations, two of which opened in fiscal year 2009.
We currently operate 12 stores in excess of 65,000 gross square feet and have
an additional five stores of that size in development, two of which are
relocations. While our larger-format stores are very powerful in dense urban
areas and certain other limited circumstances, we recognize that smaller stores
can produce great returns for us as well. Of our 53 stores in development, 12
are less than 35,000 square feet in size.
 
Tender dates provide some
visibility on the timing of our new store openings. For accounting purposes, a
property is considered tendered on the date we take possession of the leased
space for construction and other purposes, which is typically when the shell of
the store is complete or close to completion. As of November 4, 2009, 18
of our 53 stores in development had been tendered to us. These 18 stores
totaled approximately 784,000 square feet.
 
The “tender period,”
which we define as the length of time between a store’s tender date and opening
date, varies depending on several factors, some of which are outside of our
control. These factors include the size of the store and complexity of site
development, the impact of weather and unforeseen environmental issues, and
issues surrounding construction labor unions and local government authorities,
among other things. Furthermore, acquired leases, ground leases and owned
properties generally have longer tender periods than standard operating leases
because we take possession of these locations earlier in the construction
process. For stores opened during the past two fiscal years, the average tender
period was 10.9 months.
 
The following table
provides information about the Company’s store development activities:
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Properties


 


Total


 




 


 


Stores Opened


 


Stores Opened


 


Tendered


 


Leases Signed


 




 


 


During Fiscal


 


During Fiscal


 


as of


 


as of


 




 


 


Year 2008


 


Year 2009


 


November 4, 2009


 


November 4, 2009(1)


 




Number
  of stores (including relocations)


 


20


 


15


 


18


 


53


 




Number
  of relocations


 


6


 


6


 


1


 


8


 




Number
  of lease acquisitions, ground leases and owned properties


 


4


 


4


 


4


 


4


 




New
  areas


 


3


 


1


 


4


 


7


 




Average
  store size (gross square feet)


 


53,000


 


53,500


 


43,500


 


44,800


 




Total
  square footage


 


1,060,700


 


801,800


 


783,800


 


2,409,700


 




Average
  tender period in months


 


9.7


 


12.6


 


 


 


 


 




Average
  pre-opening expense per store


 


$


2.5 million


 


$


3.0 million


 


 


 


 


 




Average pre-opening rent per store


 


$


1.1 million


 


$


1.3 million


 


 


 


 


 



 
Site
Selection
 
Most of our stores are
located in high-traffic shopping areas and are either freestanding or in a
strip center. We also have a number of urban stores located in high-density,
mixed-use projects. In selecting store locations, we use an internally
developed model to analyze potential sites based on various criteria such as
education levels, population density and income levels within certain drive
times. We primarily seek to open stores that typically are located on premier
real estate sites, often in urban, high-population locales. After we have
selected a target site, our development group does a comprehensive site study
and sales projection. Each project must meet an internal EVA hurdle return,
which for new stores generally is expected to be cumulative positive EVA in
five years or less.
 
The required cash
investment for new stores varies depending on the size of the store, geographic
location, degree of work performed by the landlord and complexity of site
development issues. To a significant degree, it also depends on how the 
 
11





Table of Contents
 
project is structured,
including costs for elements that often increase or decrease rent, e.g., lease
acquisition costs, shell and/or garage costs, and landlord allowances. For
stores opened during the past two fiscal years, the average size was 53,200
square feet, and our new store investment averaged approximately $16.3 million
excluding pre-opening and relocation expenses, which averaged approximately
$2.7 million per store.
 
Store Operations
 
Team Approach to Store Operations
 
We strive to
promote a strong Company culture featuring a team approach to store operations
that we believe is distinctly more empowering of team members than that of the
traditional supermarket. Our domestic Whole Foods Market stores each employ
between 25 and 620 team members who comprise up to 13 self-managed teams per
store, each led by a team leader. Each team within a store is responsible for a
different product offering or aspect of store operations such as prepared
foods,  grocery, or customer service,
among others. We also promote a decentralized team approach to store operations
in which many decisions are made by teams at the individual store level. In
this structure, an effective store team leader is critical to the success of
the store. The store team leader works closely with one or more assistant store
team leaders, as well as with all of the department team leaders, to operate
the store as efficiently and profitably as possible. Each year, our team
members are asked to complete a confidential, third party-administered team
leader survey, which provides them with an opportunity to give their leaders
constructive feedback.
 
We believe our success is
dependent on the collective energy and intelligence of all of our team members.
We strive to create a work environment where motivated team members can
flourish and reach their highest potential, and where they are inspired by work
that provides them with a greater sense of purpose and mission. For many team
members, their job is an extension of their personal philosophy and lifestyle.
Together, we go to great lengths to satisfy and delight our customers.
Voluntary turnover of full-time team members improved from 23% in fiscal year
2008 to 12% in fiscal year 2009, which we believe is very low for the food
retailing industry and allows us to better serve our customers.
 
Team members are involved
at all levels of our business. We strive to create a Company-wide consciousness
of “shared fate” by uniting the interests of team members as closely as
possible with the interests of our shareholders. One way we reinforce this
concept is through Gainsharing. Our Gainsharing program rewards things such as
labor productivity that team members can control, giving them a direct stake in
the success of our business.
 
We also encourage stock
ownership among team members through the following programs:
 
·                  Team Member Stock Option Plan. All
full-time and part-time team members are eligible to receive a grant of stock
options each year. The annual grant has two components: (i) Annual
Leadership Grants to recognize and incentivize team member performance; and (ii) Service
Hour Grants to recognize team member service to the Company. In 2009 our Board
of Directors awarded approximately 2.6 million options to more than 18,800 team
members. Of these stock options, 92% were granted to non-executives, with 45%
awarded as Service Hour Grants alone.
 
·                  Team Member Stock Purchase Plan. Through
biweekly payroll deductions, all U.S.-based non-seasonal team members with at
least 400 service hours may elect to purchase unrestricted shares of our stock
at 95% of market value on the purchase date. The shares are purchased for the
plan participants on a quarterly basis.
 
·                  Team Member 401(k) Plan. Whole Foods
Market stock is an investment option within the Company’s 401(k) plan.
 
Store Description
 
We do not have a standard
store design model. Instead, each store’s design is customized to fit the size
and configuration of the particular location and community in which it is
located. Our culture and philosophy is one of continual innovation and
experimentation, and successful experiments are voluntarily picked up and
improved upon by our stores. We strive to transform food shopping from a chore
into a dynamic experience by building and operating stores with colorful décor,
well-trained team members, exciting product mixes, teams of in-store chefs,
ever-changing selections, samples, open kitchens, scratch bakeries,
hand-stacked produce, prepared foods stations and European-style charcuterie
departments. To further a sense of community and interaction with customers,
our stores typically include sit-down eating areas, customer comment boards and
customer service booths. We have “Take Action” centers for our customers who
want to be informed on important issues related to the environment,
legislation, food safety and product quality that can directly affect our
customers’ health and well-being. In addition, some stores offer special
services such as massage, valet parking, personal shopping and home delivery.
We believe our stores play a unique role as a third place, besides the home and
office, where people can gather, interact and learn while at the same time
discovering the many joys of eating and sharing food.
 
Purchasing and Distribution
 
Our buyers purchase
products for retail sale from local, regional, national and international
wholesale suppliers and vendors. The majority of our purchasing, particularly
in the center store, occurs at the regional and national levels. This enables
us to negotiate better volume discounts with major vendors and distributors,
while allowing our regional and store buyers to focus 
 
12





Table
of Contents
 
on local products and the
unique product mix necessary to keep a neighborhood market feel in our stores.
We are increasingly focusing more of our purchasing on producer-direct and
manufacture-direct programs, and we remain committed to buying from local
producers that meet our high quality standards.
 
We own two produce procurement centers which
facilitate the procurement and distribution of the majority of the produce we
sell. We also operate four seafood-processing and distribution facilities, a
specialty coffee and tea procurement and brewing operation, and 10 regional
distribution centers, which distribute a full range of products to our stores
across the U.S., Canada and the United Kingdom. In addition, we have five
regional commissary kitchens and eight bakehouse facilities, all of which
distribute products to our stores. Other products are typically procured through
a combination of specialty wholesalers and direct distributors.
 
United Natural Foods, Inc. is our
single largest third-party supplier, accounting for approximately 28% of our
total purchases in fiscal year 2009 compared to 32% of our total purchases in
fiscal year 2008. In November 2006, we extended our long-term relationship
with United Natural Foods as our primary supplier of dry grocery and frozen
food products. Our seven-year agreement allows us to concentrate our capital
and resources on executing on our new store development pipeline and to focus
our internal distribution efforts around key perishable departments.
 
Marketing
 
We spend much less on
advertising and marketing than other supermarkets — approximately 0.4% of our
total sales in fiscal year 2009. Instead, we rely on word-of-mouth
recommendations and testimonials from our shoppers, and we allocate our
marketing budgets among national and regional programs and our individual
stores. We also connect and engage with our customers through social media
websites, in addition to our own corporate website and blog at
www.wholefoodsmarket.com. Our stores spend most of their marketing budgets on
in-store marketing-related activities, including promotional signage and events
such as local farmers’ markets, taste fairs, classes, tours and product
samplings. We also dedicate resources to our The
Whole Deal in-store value guide and
e-newsletter. Our marketing support mirrors our business model, as well as
our commitment to the community and environment. Each store retains a separate
budget for making contributions to a variety of philanthropic and community
activities, fostering goodwill and developing a high profile with the
community. Contributions (including in-kind contributions of food) to not-for-profit
organizations amount to at least 5% of our after-tax profits annually.
 
Internet Presence
 
Our corporate website at www.wholefoodsmarket.com averages over
50,000 visitors each day and provides detailed information about our Company,
history, product offerings and store locations, with hundreds of recipes and a
library of information about environmental, legislative, health, food safety
and product quality issues. In addition, access to the Company’s SEC filings, including annual reports on Form 10-K,
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, Section 16
filings, and all amendments to those reports, are available through our
website free of
charge, as soon as reasonably practicable after these reports are filed
electronically with the SEC. As with our stores, the focus
of our website is customer service. We believe our website provides us with an
opportunity to further our relationships with customers, suppliers and
investors, to educate them on a variety of issues, and to improve our service
levels.
 
On our website, customers can create a personalized profile that
keeps track of their favorite parts of the site and a “home” store; rate and
review recipes; share value shopping tips; contribute to forums and interact
with other Whole Foods Market stakeholders; and check out the “Whole Story”
blog at http://blog.wholefoodsmarket.com, which is regularly updated for all of
the new and exciting things going on at the Company and our stores. Our
Internet community for stakeholders also includes sites like Facebook and
Twitter. As of November 20, 2009, we had over 150,000 fans on Facebook and
over 1.5 million followers on Twitter, which we believe is the highest of any
retailer. Many of our stores have set up their own Facebook and Twitter accounts.
These sites provide us with a powerful new way to communicate with our
customers, giving us insight at both a local and global level as to how we are
viewed and what our customers want and expect from us.
 
We have included our website and blog addresses only as an
inactive textual reference. The information contained on our website is not
incorporated by reference into this Report on Form 10-K.
 
Customer
Service
 
Customers are our most
important stakeholder, because without our customers, we would have no
business. We genuinely care about the well-being of our customers and empower
our team members to do whatever it takes to meet or exceed their expectations
on every shopping trip. By doing so, we turn our customers into advocates for
our business who do more than shop with us; they recommend Whole Foods Market
to their friends and others. We want to serve our customers competently,
efficiently, and knowledgeably. We believe that we generate greater
appreciation and loyalty from our customers by educating them about natural and
organic foods, health, nutrition and the environment through our in-store “Take
Action” centers, The Whole Deal
in-store value guide, Value Tours, as well as on our corporate website and
social networking sites. In June 2009, 
 
13





Table
of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market ranked
#7 on MSN Money’s third annual Customer Service Hall of Fame list, a survey of
145 companies based on consumers’ customer service experience.
 
Competition
 
Food retailing is a
large, intensely competitive industry. Our competition varies across the
company and includes but is not limited to local, regional, national and
international conventional and specialty supermarkets, natural foods stores,
warehouse membership clubs, smaller specialty stores, farmers’ markets, and
restaurants, each of which competes with us on the basis of product selection,
quality, customer service, price or a combination of these factors. We believe
our commitment to natural and organic products, high quality standards; our
emphasis on perishable product sales; our focus on customer service; and our
competitive prices on comparable products differentiate us in this marketplace.
We also believe our strongest competitive advantage is our culture and
empowered team members.
 
While growth has slowed
from historical levels, natural and organic food is still one of the fastest
growing segments of food retailing today. Most supermarkets offer at least a
limited selection of these products, while some have chosen to expand their
selection more aggressively. We believe it works to our benefit for other
supermarkets to offer natural and organic products for two reasons: first, it helps
fulfill our Company mission to improve the health, well-being and healing of
both people and the planet, and second, it helps create new customers for us by
creating a gateway experience. As more people are exposed to the benefits of
natural and organic products, we believe they are more likely to become Whole
Foods Market customers since we are a category leader for natural and organic
products, offering one of the largest selections and most informed customer
service at competitive prices.
 
Competition makes us a
better retailer. We are constantly evolving, innovating and maturing, and we
have a long track record of responding to competition and improving from it. We
believe we are better positioned from a value and price perspective today than
we ever have been. Our buy-side initiatives are continuing to deliver
opportunities that will allow us to be more price competitive, and we are
leveraging our global buying power to the benefit of our customers. On the sell
side, we remain focused on innovation that redefines the marketplace and
further differentiates our stores, products, and customer experience from the
competition.
 
The Whole Deal
 
Whole
Foods Market has always provided customers with a great value on the products
we offer: high-quality perishables and products from sources consumers trust,
thanks to our rigorous Quality Standards and focus on natural and organic
foods. Our national “The Whole Deal” campaign launched in fiscal year 2008
emphasizes the value side of our story even more. The Whole
Deal is about giving customers the whole story to help them stretch
their grocery and household dollars further without sacrificing the benefits of
natural and organic foods. The program includes The Whole
Deal in-store value guide available in our stores, which contains
coupons, budget-conscious recipes, money saving tips and more; in-store Value
Tours led by our “Value Gurus” to help shoppers find the best deals in every
department; and Sure Deal specials, which are special deals on high-quality
products our customers want, not discounts on overstocked or discontinued
items.
 
While
on a local level we watch our pricing against our major competitors in every
market, we also benchmark our pricing versus key national and strong regional
competitors in 11 metro areas on a comprehensive market basket representing
perishable, branded and exclusive items across the store. By investing
intelligently in pricing on the key items that our customers demand most, we
believe our value efforts continue to gain traction. Customer demand for our The Whole Deal in-store value guide has grown from an
initial 800,000 copies quarterly to 1.3 million copies bimonthly. In addition,
we have nearly 500,000 The Whole Deal
e-newsletter subscribers.
 
Team
Members
 
As of September 27, 2009,
we had approximately 52,500 team members, including approximately 43,000
full-time, 7,500 part-time and 2,000 temporary team members.
 
One of our core values is
supporting team member happiness and excellence, and we believe our innovative
and egalitarian work environment with team members involved at all levels of
our business is a major reason for our success. We believe happy team members
create happy customers, and happy customers create happy investors. Team
members who have a voice in shaping the direction of our Company and their
future are empowered to make Whole Foods Market not only a great place to shop
but a great place to build a career. All of our full-time and part-time team
members are eligible to receive stock options through annual leadership grants
or through service hour grants once they have accumulated 6,000 service hours
(approximately three years of employment). Approximately 94% of the stock
options granted under the Company’s stock option plan since its inception in
1992 have been granted to team members who are not executive officers.
 
Our salary and benefits
programs reflect our philosophy of egalitarianism. The primary objective is to
attract and retain qualified, energetic team members who are enthusiastic about
our Company mission and culture. A further objective is to 
 
14





Table
of Contents
 
provide incentives and to
reward each of our team members for their contribution to the Company. Finally,
we endeavor to ensure that our salary and benefits programs are perceived as
fundamentally fair to all stakeholders. Our books are open to our team members,
including our annual individual compensation report. Our benefits programs,
including those for our executive officers, are based on years of service, not
on title or position. We also have a salary cap that limits the total cash
compensation paid to any team member in a calendar year to 19 times the average
annual wage of all team members. In addition, our chief executive officer, John
Mackey, has voluntarily set his annual salary at $1 and receives no cash
bonuses or stock option awards.
 
Team members are
encouraged to take an active role in choosing the benefits made available by
the Company by participating in a Company-wide benefits vote every three years.
The Company’s third vote was held in fiscal year 2009 to determine the benefits
program that will be in place from 2010 through 2012. Approximately 84% of
eligible team members voted in this important process, resulting in a benefits
package that reflects the needs and desires of the majority of team members in
the Company. One outcome of the vote is that Whole Foods Market provides
healthcare at no cost to eligible full-time team members. Eligible full-time
team members are those who work 30 or more hours per week and have worked a
minimum of 10,000 service hours. Those who have worked a minimum of 800 service
hours pay a medical premium of $10 per biweekly period. Dependent healthcare
premiums are generally shared based on a team member’s tenure with the Company;
the team member’s share decreases as his/her tenure increases, with dependent
premiums 100% Company-paid at 10,000 service hours. In addition, the Company
provides Personal Wellness Accounts (“PWA”) of up to $1,800 per year, based on
years of service, to help cover the cost of deductibles and other allowable
out-of-pocket health care expenses not covered by insurance. Unused funds roll
forward at the end of the year, enabling a team member’s balance to accumulate
over time.
 
For the past 12 years,
our team members have helped Whole Foods Market become one of FORTUNE magazine’s “100 Best Companies to Work for in
America.” In scoring companies, Fortune places the greatest weight (two-thirds
of the total) on responses to a random survey of 400 employees, with the
remainder being Fortune’s evaluation of each company’s credibility, respect,
fairness and pride/camaraderie. Ranking number 22 in 2009, we are one of only
13 companies to make the “100 Best” list for 12 consecutive years since its
inception.
 
Government
and Public Affairs
 
Our stores are subject to
various local, state, federal and international laws, regulations and
administrative practices affecting our business. We must comply with provisions
regulating health and sanitation standards, food labeling, equal employment,
minimum wages, licensing for the sale of food, and in many stores, licensing
for beer and wine or other alcoholic beverages.
 
The manufacturing,
processing, formulating, packaging, labeling and advertising of products are
subject to regulation by various federal agencies including the Food and Drug
Administration (“FDA”), the Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), the Consumer
Product Safety Commission (“CPSC”), the USDA and the EPA. The composition and
labeling of nutritional supplements are most actively regulated by the FDA
under the provisions of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (“FFDC Act”).
The FFDC Act has been revised in recent years with respect to dietary
supplements by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act and by the Dietary
Supplement Health and Education Act. We believe we are in compliance with all
product labeling requirements material to the Company.
 
Trademarks
 
Trademarks owned by the
Company or its subsidiaries include, but are not limited to: “Whole Foods
Market,” “365 Everyday Value,” “365 Organic Everyday Value,” “AFA,” “Allegro
Coffee Company,” “Wild Oats,” “Wild Oats Marketplace,” “Capers Community Market,”
“Bread & Circus,” “Fresh & Wild,” “Fresh Fields,” “Green
Mission,” “Harry’s Farmers Market,” “Ideal Market,” “Merchant of Vino,” “Mrs. Gooch’s,”
“Vine Buys,” “Wellspring,” “Whole Baby,” “The Whole Deal,” “Whole Foods, Whole
People, Whole Planet,” “Whole Kids Organic,” and “Whole Trade.” The Company or
its subsidiaries also holds registrations or applications, and maintains common
law trademark rights for stylized logos and brand names for products created by
Allegro Coffee Company and many of its private label products.
 
Executive
Officers of the Registrant
 
The following table sets
forth the name, age, tenure with the Company in years, and position of each of
the persons who was serving as an executive officer of the Company as of November 20,
2009:
 



Name


 


Age


 


Tenure


 


Position


 




John
  Mackey


 


56


 


31


 


Chairman of the Board
  and Chief Executive Officer


 




A.C.
  Gallo


 


56


 


16


 


Co-President and Chief
  Operating Officer


 




Walter
  Robb


 


56


 


18


 


Co-President and Chief
  Operating Officer


 




Glenda
  Chamberlain


 


56


 


21


 


Executive Vice
  President and Chief Financial Officer


 




James
  P. Sud


 


57


 


12


 


Executive Vice
  President of Growth and Business Development


 



 
15





Table of Contents
 
John Mackey, co-founder
of the Company, has served as Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
since 1980.
 
A.C. Gallo has served as
Co-President of the Company since September 2004 and as Co-Chief Operating
Officer since December 2003. Mr. Gallo has held various positions
with the Company and with Bread & Circus, Inc., which was
acquired by the Company in October 1992, including Vice President and
President of the North Atlantic Region, and Executive Vice President of Operations.
 
Walter Robb has served as
Co-President of the Company since September 2004 and as Co-Chief Operating
Officer since December 2003. Since joining the Company in 1991, Mr. Robb
has also served as Store Team Leader, President of the Northern Pacific Region,
and Executive Vice President of Operations.
 
Glenda Chamberlain has
served as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of the Company
since December 1988.
 
James P. Sud has served
as Executive Vice President of Growth and Business Development since February 2001.
Mr. Sud joined the Company in May 1997 and served as Vice President
and Chief Operating Officer until February 2001. Mr. Sud served as a
director of the Company from 1980 to 1997.
 
Item 1A.   Risk
Factors.
 
We wish to caution you
that there are risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to
be materially different from those indicated by forward-looking statements that
we make from time to time in filings with the SEC, news releases, reports,
proxy statements, registration statements and other written communications, as
well as oral forward-looking statements made from time to time by
representatives of the Company. These risks and uncertainties include the risk
factors described below. The cautionary statements below discuss important
factors that could cause our business, financial condition, operating results
and cash flows to be materially adversely affected. The Company does not
undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements.
 
Economic
Conditions that Impact Consumer Spending Could Materially Impact Our Business
 
The
global economic crisis adversely impacted our business and financial results in
fiscal year 2009 and the
ongoing economic uncertainty continues to negatively affect consumer confidence
and discretionary spending. Our
results of operations may be materially impacted by changes in overall economic
conditions that impact consumer confidence and spending, including
discretionary spending. There can be no assurance that various governmental
activities to stabilize the markets and stimulate the economy will restore
consumer confidence or change spending habits. Future economic conditions
affecting disposable consumer income such as employment levels, business
conditions, changes in housing market conditions, the availability of credit,
interest rates, tax rates, fuel and energy costs, the impact of natural
disasters or acts of terrorism, and other matters could reduce consumer
spending or cause consumers to shift their spending to lower-priced
competitors.
 
Our
Growth Depends on New Store Openings
 
Our continued growth
depends to some degree on our ability to open new stores in existing and new
areas and to operate those stores successfully. Successful implementation of
this strategy is dependent on finding suitable locations, and we face intense
competition from other retailers for such sites. There can be no assurance that
we will continue to grow through new store openings. We may not be able to
timely open new stores or operate them successfully. Also, we may not be able
to successfully hire and train new team members or integrate those team members
into the programs and policies of the Company. We may not be able to adapt our
distribution, management information and other operating systems to adequately
supply products to new stores at competitive prices so that we can operate the
stores in a successful and profitable manner.
 
New
Stores May Negatively Impact Our Results
 
There can be no assurance
that our new store openings will be successful or result in greater sales and
profitability for the Company. New stores build their sales volumes and refine
their merchandise selection over time and, as a result, generally have lower
gross margins and higher operating expenses as a percentage of sales than our
more mature stores. There may be a negative impact on our results from a lower
contribution of new stores, along with the impact of related pre-opening and
relocation costs.
 
Increased
Competition May Have an Adverse Effect on Profitability
 
Our competitors include
but are not limited to local, regional, national and international
supermarkets, natural food stores, warehouse membership clubs, small specialty
stores and restaurants. Their businesses compete with us for products,
customers and locations. In addition, some are expanding more aggressively in
marketing a range of natural and organic foods. Some of these potential
competitors may have been in business longer or may have greater financial or
marketing resources than we do and may be able to devote greater resources to
sourcing, promoting and selling their products. As 
 
16





Table
of Contents
 
competition in certain
areas intensifies, our results of operations may be negatively impacted through
a loss of sales, reduction in margin from competitive price changes, and/or
greater operating costs such as marketing.
 
We May Experience
Significant Fluctuations in Our Identical Store Sales
 
Our results of operations
may be materially impacted by fluctuations in our identical store sales. Our
identical store sales could fluctuate or be lower than our historical average
for many reasons including new and acquired stores entering into the identical
store base, the opening of new stores that cannibalize store sales in existing
areas, general economic conditions, increased competition, price changes in
response to competitive factors, possible supply shortages, and cycling against
any year of above-average sales results.
 
We May Experience
Significant Fluctuations in Our Quarterly Operating Results
 
Our quarterly operating
results could fluctuate for many reasons, including losses from new stores,
variations in the mix of product sales, price changes in response to
competitive factors and a potential lack of customer acceptance, foreign
currency exchange rate fluctuations, increases in store operating costs,
including commodity costs, that are either wholly or partially beyond our control,
possible supply shortages, general economic conditions, health care costs,
legal costs, insurance costs, extreme weather-related disruptions, including
hurricanes and earthquakes, and potential uninsured casualty losses or other
losses. In addition, our quarterly operating results and quarter-to-quarter
comparisons have been and may be impacted by the timing of new store openings,
construction and pre-opening expenses, the timing of acquisitions, store
closures and relocations, seasonality, and the range of operating results
generated from newly opened stores. Quarter-to-quarter comparisons of results
of operations have been and may be materially impacted by the timing of new
store openings.
 
Our Stock
Price Is Volatile
 
From September 29,
2008 to September 27, 2009, the quoted market price per share of our
common stock ranged from $7.04 to $30.13. The market price of our common stock
could be subject to significant fluctuation in response to various market
factors and events. These market factors and events include variations in our
sales and earnings results and any failure to meet market expectations; changes
in ratings and earnings estimates by securities analysts; publicity regarding
us, our competitors, or the natural products industry generally; new statutes
or regulations or changes in the interpretation of existing statutes or
regulations affecting the natural products industry specifically; and sales of
substantial amounts of common stock in the public market or the perception that
such sales could occur and other factors. In addition, the stock market in
recent years has experienced broad price and volume fluctuations that often
have been unrelated to the operating performance of particular companies. These
market fluctuations also may adversely affect the market price of our common
stock. Our cash flow from the exercise of team member stock options may be
adversely affected in the future by fluctuations in the market price of our
common stock.
 
We May Be Subject to Product
Liability Claims and Reduced Brand Value if People Are Harmed By the Products
We Sell
 
There is increasing
governmental scrutiny of and public awareness regarding food safety. We believe
that many customers choose to shop our stores because of their interest in
health, nutrition and food safety. We believe that our customers hold us to a
higher food safety standard than other supermarkets. Even isolated business
incidents can erode consumer trust, particularly if the incidents receive
considerable publicity or result in litigation, which can significantly reduce
brand value. The real or perceived sale of contaminated food products by us
could result in product liability claims, the settlement or outcome of which
might have a material adverse effect on our sales and operations.
 
Changes
in the Availability of Quality Natural and Organic Products Could Impact Our
Business
 
There is no assurance
that quality natural and organic products will be available to meet our future
needs. If other supermarkets significantly increase their natural and organic
product offerings or if new laws require the reformulation of certain products
to meet tougher standards, the supply of these products may be constrained. Any
significant disruption in the supply of quality natural and organic products
could have a material impact on our overall sales and cost of goods sold.
 
Future
Economic Factors Could Cause Impairment of Goodwill
 
Our total assets included
goodwill totaling approximately $658.3 million at September 27, 2009.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually at the beginning of the fourth
fiscal quarter or more frequently if impairment indicators arise. We allocate
goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. Our impairment
reviews require extensive use of accounting judgment and financial estimates.
Application of alternative assumptions and definitions, such as reviewing
goodwill for impairment at a different organization level, could produce
significantly different results. We may be required to recognize impairments of
goodwill based on future economic factors such as unfavorable changes in the
Company’s stock price and market capitalization, unfavorable changes in
valuations of comparable companies, or unfavorable changes in estimated future
discounted cash flows of the Company’s reporting unit. Impairment of goodwill
could result in material charges that would adversely affect our results of
operations and capitalization.
 
17





Table
of Contents
 
Future Events Could Result in
Impairment of Our Long-Lived Assets
 
Our total assets included
long-lived assets totaling approximately $1.9 billion at September 27,
2009. Long-lived assets are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes
in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be
recoverable. Our impairment evaluations require use of financial estimates of
future cash flows. Application of alternative assumptions could produce significantly
different results. We may be required to recognize impairments of long-lived
assets based on future economic factors such as unfavorable changes in
estimated future undiscounted cash flows of an asset group. Long-lived asset
impairments could result in material charges that would adversely affect our
results of operations and capitalization.
 
We Have
Significant Indebtedness
 
We have significant debt
and may incur additional debt in the future. A significant portion of our
future cash flow from operating activities may be dedicated to the payment of
interest and the repayment of principal on our indebtedness. We may not be able
to refinance our debt in the future on terms acceptable to us, or at all. Our
indebtedness could limit our ability to obtain additional financing for working
capital, capital expenditures, debt service requirements, acquisitions or other
purposes in the future. There is no guarantee that we will be able to meet our
debt service obligations. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow to
meet our debt service obligations, we may be required to take measures such as
seeking additional financing in the debt or equity markets, refinancing or
restructuring all of a portion of our indebtedness, selling selected assets or reducing
or delaying planned capital or operating expenditures. If we fail to comply
with our debt covenants we will be in default, in which case there can be no
assurance that we would be able to cure the default, receive waivers from our
lenders, amend the loan agreements or refinance the debt.
 
We Have Significant Lease
Obligations
 
The majority of our
stores, distribution centers, bakehouses and administrative facilities are
leased, with expiration dates ranging from one to 35 years. We are subject to
risks associated with our current and future real estate leases. Our costs
could increase because of changes in the real estate markets and supply or
demand for real estate sites. We generally cannot cancel our leases, so if we
decide to close a location, we may nonetheless be committed to perform our
obligations under the applicable lease including paying the base rent for the
remaining lease term. As each lease expires, we may fail to negotiate
renewals, either on commercially acceptable terms or at all. As of September 27,
2009, we had 29 leased properties that are not being utilized in current
operations with expiration dates ranging from three to 15 years
 
Self-Insurance
Plan Claims Could Materially Impact Our Results
 
The Company uses a
combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for the potential
liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability, property insurance,
director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability and team member
health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the risks that are retained
by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering historical claims
experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial
assumptions. Our results could be materially impacted by claims and other expenses
related to such plans if future occurrences and claims differ from these
assumptions and historical trends.
 
Perishable Foods Product Losses Could Materially
Impact Our Results
 
We
believe our stores more heavily emphasize perishable products than other
supermarket stores. Perishable products accounted for approximately 66% of
total sales at Whole Foods Market locations in fiscal year 2009. The Company’s
emphasis on perishable products may result in significant product inventory
losses in the event of extended power outages, natural disasters or other
catastrophic occurrences.
 
Legal Proceedings Could
Materially Impact Our Results
 
From time to time, we are
party to legal proceedings, including matters involving personnel and
employment issues, personal injury, intellectual property, acquisitions, and
other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. Our results could
be materially impacted by the decisions and expenses related to pending or
future proceedings.
 
The Loss
of Key Management Could Negatively Affect Our Business
 
We are dependent upon a
number of key management and other team members. If we were to lose the
services of a significant number of key team members within a short period of
time, this could have a material adverse effect on our operations. We do not
maintain key person insurance on any team member. Our continued success also is
dependent upon our ability to attract and retain qualified team members to meet
our future growth needs. We face intense competition for qualified team
members, many of whom are subject to offers from competing employers. We may
not be able to attract and retain necessary team members to operate our
business.
 
A
Widespread Health Epidemic Could
Materially Impact Our Business
 
The Company’s business
could be severely impacted by a widespread regional, national or global health
epidemic. Our stores are a place where customers come together, interact and
learn while at the same time discovering the many joys of eating and 
 
18





Table
of Contents
 
sharing food. A
widespread health epidemic may cause customers to avoid public gathering places
or otherwise change their shopping behaviors. Additionally, a widespread health
epidemic could also adversely impact our business by disrupting production and
delivery of products to our stores and by impacting our ability to
appropriately staff our stores.
 
Unions May Attempt
to Organize Our Team Members
 
From time to time, unions
have attempted to organize all or part of our team member base at certain
stores and non-retail facilities. Responding to such organization attempts is
distracting to management and team members and may have a negative financial
impact on a store, facility or the Company as a whole.
 
Unfavorable Changes in Government
Regulation Could Harm Our Business
 
The Company is subject to
various international, federal, state and local laws, regulations and
administrative practices affecting our business, and we must comply with
provisions regulating health and sanitation standards, food labeling, equal
employment, minimum wages, and licensing for the sale of food and, in some
stores, alcoholic beverages. Our new store openings could be delayed or
prevented or our existing stores could be impacted by difficulties or failures
in our ability to obtain or maintain required approvals or licenses. Changes in
existing laws or implementation of new laws, regulations and practices (e.g., health
care reform and/or card check legislation) could have a significant impact on
our business.
 
The USDA’s Organic Rule facilitates
interstate commerce and the marketing of organically produced food and provides
assurance to our customers that such products meet consistent, uniform
standards. Compliance with this rule could pose a significant burden on
some of our suppliers, which may cause a disruption in some of our product
offerings.
 
We cannot predict the
nature of future laws, regulations, interpretations or applications, or
determine what effect either additional government regulations or
administrative orders, when and if promulgated, or disparate federal, state and
local regulatory schemes would have on our business in the future. They could,
however, require the reformulation of certain products to meet new standards,
the recall or discontinuance of certain products not able to be reformulated,
additional record keeping, expanded documentation of the properties of certain
products, expanded or different labeling and/or scientific substantiation. Any
or all of such requirements could have an adverse effect on our results of
operations and financial condition.
 
Our Results Are Subject to the
Risks of Doing Business in Other Countries
 
Though small as a
percentage of our total sales, the Company’s international operations are
subject to certain risks of conducting business abroad, including fluctuations
in foreign currency exchange rates, changes in regulatory requirements, and
changes or uncertainties in the economic, social and political conditions in
the Company’s geographic areas, among other things.
 
We May Not Be Able to
Adequately Protect Our Intellectual Property Rights
 
We rely on a combination
of trademark, trade secret and copyright law and internal procedures and
nondisclosure agreements to protect our intellectual property. There can be no
assurance that our intellectual property rights can be successfully asserted in
the future or will not be invalidated, circumvented or challenged. In addition,
the laws of certain foreign countries in which our products may be produced or
sold do not protect our intellectual property rights to the same extent as the
laws of the United States. Failure to protect our proprietary information could
have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and
financial condition.
 
Changes
in Accounting Standards Could Materially Impact Our Results
 
Generally accepted
accounting principles and related accounting pronouncements, implementation
guidelines, and interpretations for many aspects of our business, such as
accounting for insurance and self-insurance, inventories, goodwill and
intangible assets, derivatives, store closures, leases, income taxes and
share-based payments, are highly complex and involve subjective judgments.
Changes in these rules or their interpretation could significantly change
or add significant volatility to our reported earnings without a comparable
underlying change in cash flow from operations.
 
Effective Tax Rate Changes and
Results of Examinations by Taxing Authorities Could Materially Impact Our
Results
 
Our future effective tax
rates could be adversely affected by the earnings mix being lower than
historical results in states or countries where we have lower statutory
rates and higher than historical results in states or countries where we
have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax
assets and liabilities, or by changes in tax laws or interpretations thereof.
In addition, we are subject to periodic audits and examinations by the Internal
Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other state and local taxing authorities. Our
results could be materially impacted by the determinations and expenses related
to these and other proceedings by the IRS and other state and local taxing
authorities.
 
19





Table
of Contents
 
Disruptions in Our Information Systems Could Harm
Our Ability to Run Our Business
 
We rely extensively on information systems for point-of-sale processing
in our stores, supply chain, financial reporting, human resources and various
other processes and transactions. Our information systems are subject to damage
or interruption from power outages, computer and telecommunications failures,
computer viruses, security breaches, including breaches of our transaction
processing or other systems that could result in the compromise of confidential
customer data, catastrophic events, and usage errors by our team members. If
our systems are breached, damaged or cease to function properly, we may have to
make significant investments to fix or replace them, suffer interruptions in
our operations, face costly litigation, and our reputation with our customers
may be harmed. Any material interruption in our computer operations may have a
material adverse effect on our business or results of operations.
 
Failure of Our Internal Control over
Financial Reporting Could Materially Impact Our Business and Results
 
The Company’s management is responsible for establishing and
maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. An internal
control system, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only
reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control system
are met. Further, the design of a control system must reflect the fact that
there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered
relative to their costs. Because of the inherent limitations in all internal
control systems, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Any failure to maintain an effective system of internal
control over financial reporting could limit our ability to report our
financial results accurately and timely or to detect and prevent fraud, and
could expose us to litigation or adversely affect the market price of our
common stock. The Company’s management concluded that its internal control over
financial reporting was effective as of September 27, 2009. See “Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures — Management’s Report on Internal Control over
Financial Reporting.”
 
Item 1B.   Unresolved Staff Comments.
 
Not applicable.
 
Item 2.      Properties.
 
As of September 27, 2009, we operated 284 stores:
273 stores in 38 U.S. states and the District of Columbia; six stores in
Canada; and five stores in the United Kingdom. This includes 53 stores acquired
from Wild Oats Markets, Inc. on August 28, 2007: 51 stores in 20 U.S.
states and two stores in Canada. We own 11 stores, three distribution
facilities and land for one store in development, including the adjacent
property. We also own a building on leased land, which is leased to third
parties, and have three stores in development on leased land. All other stores,
distribution centers, bakehouses and administrative facilities are leased, with
expiration dates ranging from one to 35 years. We have options to renew most of
our leases in five-year increments with renewal periods ranging from five to 50
years. In addition, as of September 27, 2009, we had 29 leased properties
that are not being utilized in current operations, of which 21 are related to
Wild Oats, with expiration dates ranging from three to 15 years. We are
actively negotiating to sublease or terminate leases related to these
locations.
 
The following table shows
the number of our stores by state, the District of Columbia, Canada and the
United Kingdom as of September 27, 2009:
 



 


 


Number


 


 


 


Number


 


 


 


Number


 




Location


 


of
  Stores


 


Location


 


of
  Stores


 


Location


 


of
  Stores


 




Alabama


 


1


 


Kentucky


 


2


 


Ohio


 


6


 




Arkansas


 


1


 


Louisiana


 


3


 


Oklahoma


 


1


 




Arizona


 


7


 


Maine


 


1


 


Oregon


 


6


 




California


 


54


 


Maryland


 


7


 


Pennsylvania


 


7


 




Canada


 


6


 


Massachusetts


 


20


 


Rhode Island


 


3


 




Colorado


 


19


 


Michigan


 


5


 


South Carolina


 


2


 




Connecticut


 


5


 


Minnesota


 


2


 


Tennessee


 


3


 




District of Columbia


 


3


 


Missouri


 


3


 


Texas


 


14


 




Florida


 


16


 


Nebraska


 


1


 


United Kingdom


 


5


 




Georgia


 


7


 


Nevada


 


5


 


Utah


 


4


 




Hawaii


 


1


 


New Jersey


 


10


 


Virginia


 


9


 




Illinois


 


16


 


New Mexico


 


4


 


Washington


 


5


 




Indiana


 


2


 


New York


 


9


 


Wisconsin


 


2


 




Kansas


 


2


 


North Carolina


 


5


 


 


 


 


 



 
20





Table of Contents
 
Item 3.      Legal Proceedings.
 
From time to time we are a party to legal proceedings including matters
involving personnel and employment issues, personal injury, intellectual
property and other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business which
have not resulted in any material losses to date. Although management does not
expect that the outcome in these proceedings will have a material adverse
effect on our financial condition or results of operations, litigation is
inherently unpredictable. Therefore, we could incur judgments or enter into
settlements of claims that could materially impact our results.
 
The FTC had challenged the Company’s August 28, 2007 acquisition
of Wild Oats Markets, Inc. Prior to completion of the Wild Oats
acquisition, the FTC had filed a motion in the United States District Court for
the District of Columbia seeking a preliminary injunction to enjoin the
acquisition. The FTC had also filed a complaint commencing an administrative
proceeding challenging the acquisition.
 
On August 16, 2007, the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia denied the FTC’s motion for a preliminary injunction. The
FTC appealed denial of the preliminary injunction motion to the United States
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and on July 29, 2008
the Court of Appeals reversed the District Court and remanded the case to the
District Court for further proceedings. On remand, the FTC renewed its motion
for preliminary injunctive relief pending resolution of the administrative
action, specifically seeking a hold separate order, the rebranding of all former
Wild Oats stores, and the appointment of a trustee or special master to
establish an independent management team for the former Wild Oats assets and
oversee Whole Foods Market’s compliance with the order. The administrative
proceeding was scheduled to commence on April 6, 2009. On January 28,
2009, the FTC issued an order granting the Company’s motion to withdraw the
administrative case from adjudication for the purpose of considering a proposed
consent agreement that would resolve the administrative proceeding. A further
order dated February 4, 2009 extended the withdrawal through March 6,
2009.
 
On March 6, 2009, the Company reached a settlement agreement with
the FTC. Pursuant to FTC protocol, the settlement agreement was placed on
public record for a 30-day comment period which ended April 6, 2009. The
Company received final approval of the settlement agreement by the FTC
Commissioners on June 1, 2009. Under the terms of the agreement, a
third-party divestiture trustee was appointed to market for sale until September 8,
2009:  leases and related assets for 19
non-operating former Wild Oats stores; leases and related fixed assets
(excluding inventory) for 12 operating acquired Wild Oats stores and one
operating Whole Foods Market store; and Wild Oats trademarks and other
intellectual property associated with the Wild Oats stores.
 
Pursuant to the settlement agreement, the divestiture period has been
extended by the FTC until March 8, 2010 to allow for good faith offers
that have not been finalized for six operating and two non-operating former
Wild Oats stores as well as Wild Oats trademarks and other intellectual
property associated with the Wild Oats stores. The divestiture period for those
eight stores may be extended further only to allow the FTC to approve any
previously submitted purchase agreements. The seven remaining operating stores
may be retained by the Company without further obligation to attempt to divest.
 
Pursuant to the FTC’s approval of the final consent order, the Company
has recorded adjustments totaling approximately $4.8 million to measure
long-lived assets and certain lease liabilities related to certain of the
operating stores for which sale and transfer of the assets was determined to be
probable or more likely than not at the lower of carrying amount or fair value
less costs to sell. The total fair value associated with these locations at September 27,
2009 was approximately $0.1 million. The Company has determined that these
locations do not meet the conditions for reporting their results in
discontinued operations. Cash expenses relating to legal and trustee fees are
not expected to be material. No additional material charges are expected
related to the potential sale of the six operating stores, the two
non-operating properties for which a lease liability reserve is already
recorded, or the trademarks which have been fully amortized.
 
On October 27, 2008, Whole Foods Market was
served with the complaint in Kottaras v. Whole Foods Market, Inc., a
putative class action filed in the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia, seeking treble damages, equitable, injunctive, and
declaratory relief and alleging that the acquisition and merger between Whole
Foods Market and Wild Oats violates various provisions of the federal antitrust
laws. This case is in the preliminary stages. Whole Foods Market cannot at this
time predict the likely outcome of this judicial proceeding or estimate the
amount or range of loss or possible loss that may arise from it. The Company
has not accrued any loss related to the outcome of this case as of September 27,
2009.
 
Item 4.      Submission of Matters to a Vote of
Security Holders.
 
Not applicable.
 
21





Table
of Contents
 
PART II
 
Item 5.      Market for Registrant’s Common Equity,
Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
 
Whole Foods Market’s common stock is traded on the
NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “WFMI.”
 
The Company was added to Standard & Poor’s
S&P 500 index in December 2005.
 
The following sets forth the intra-day quarterly high
and low sale prices of the Company’s common stock for fiscal years 2009 and
2008:
 



 


 


High


 


Low


 




2009


 


 


 


 


 




September 29,
  2008 to January 18, 2009


 


$


22.21


 


$


7.04


 




January 19,
  2009 to April 12, 2009


 


19.11


 


9.06


 




April 13,
  2009 to July 5, 2009


 


23.71


 


17.08


 




July 6,
  2009 to September 27, 2009


 


30.13


 


17.16


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




2008


 


 


 


 


 




October 1,
  2007 to January 20, 2008


 


$


53.65


 


$


34.37


 




January 21,
  2008 to April 13, 2008


 


42.48


 


29.99


 




April 14,
  2008 to July 6, 2008


 


36.03


 


22.63


 




July 7,
  2008 to September 28, 2008


 


24.22


 


17.37


 



 
As of November 20, 2009, there were 1,607 holders
of record of Whole Foods Market’s common stock, and the closing stock price was
$26.36.
 
Dividends per Common Share
 
On August 5, 2008,
the Company announced that its Board of Directors suspended the Company’s
quarterly cash dividend to common shareholders for the foreseeable future. Following
is a summary of dividends declared per common share during fiscal year 2008 (in
thousands, except per share amounts):
 



Date of


 


Dividend
  per


 


Date of


 


Date of


 


Total


 




Declaration


 


Common
  Share


 


Record


 


Payment


 


Amount


 




November 20,
  2007


 


$


0.20


 


January 11, 2008


 


January 22, 2008


 


$


27,901


 




March 10,
  2008


 


0.20


 


April 11, 2008


 


April 22, 2008


 


28,041


 




June 11,
  2008


 


0.20


 


July 11, 2008


 


July 22, 2008


 


28,057


 

















 
Treasury Stock
 
During the first quarter of fiscal year 2008, the Company retired all
shares held in treasury, totaling approximately $200 million. The Company’s
remaining authorization under the stock repurchase program at September 27,
2009 was approximately $200 million through November 8, 2009. On November 8,
2009, the Company’s stock repurchase program expired and was not renewed.
 
Redeemable Preferred Stock
 
On
December 2, 2008, the Company issued 425,000 shares of Series A 8%
Redeemable, Convertible Exchangeable Participating Preferred Stock, $0.01 par
value per share (“Series A Preferred Stock”) to affiliates of Leonard
Green & Partners, L.P., for approximately $413.1 million, net of
approximately $11.9 million in closing and issuance costs. Subsequent to the
end of fiscal year 2009, on October 23, 2009 the Company announced its
intention to call all 425,000 outstanding shares of the Series A Preferred
Stock for redemption in accordance with the terms governing such Series A
Preferred Stock. Subject to conversion of the Series A Preferred Stock by
its holders, the Company planned to redeem such Series A Preferred Stock
on November 27, 2009 at a price per share equal to $1,000 plus accrued and
unpaid dividends. In accordance with the terms governing the Series A
Preferred Stock, at any time prior to the redemption date, the Series A
Preferred Stock could be converted by the holders thereof. On November 26,
2009 the holders of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock converted all
outstanding shares into approximately 29.7 million shares of Company common
stock, bringing the total number of common shares outstanding to approximately
170.3 million shares. The shares of common stock will be issued using a
transaction exempt from registration pursuant to Section 3(a)(9) of
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. During fiscal year 2009, the Company
paid cash dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock totaling approximately
$19.8 million.
 
22





Table of
Contents
 
The
following table summarizes information about the Company’s equity compensation
plans by type as of September 27, 2009 (in thousands, except per share
amounts):
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Options


 




 


 


 


 


Weighted


 


Available


 




 


 


Options


 


Average


 


for Future


 




Plan Category


 


Outstanding


 


Exercise Price


 


Issuance


 




Approved by
  security holders


 


18,317


 


$


45.24


 


15,448


 




Not approved by
  security holders


 


—


 


—


 


—


 




Total


 


18,317


 


$


45.24


 


15,448


 



 
23





Table of
Contents
 
Item 6.      Selected
Financial Data.
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Summary Financial Information
(In
thousands, except per share amounts and operating data)
 
The following selected financial data are derived from the Company’s
consolidated financial statements and should be read in conjunction with “Item
7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations” and “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
 



 


 


Sept. 27,


 


Sept. 28,


 


Sept. 30,


 


Sept. 24,


 


Sept. 25,


 




 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 


2005


 




Consolidated
  Statements of Operations Data(1)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Sales


 


$


8,031,620


 


$


7,953,912


 


$


6,591,773


 


$


5,607,376


 


$


4,701,289


 




Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


5,277,310


 


5,247,207


 


4,295,170


 


3,647,734


 


3,052,184


 




Gross profit


 


2,754,310


 


2,706,705


 


2,296,603


 


1,959,642


 


1,649,105


 




Direct store
  expenses


 


2,145,809


 


2,107,940


 


1,711,229


 


1,421,968


 


1,223,473


 




General and
  administrative expenses


 


243,749


 


270,428


 


217,743


 


181,244


 


158,864


 




Pre-opening
  expenses


 


49,218


 


55,554


 


59,319


 


32,058


 


33,856


 




Relocation,
  store closure, and lease termination costs


 


31,185


 


36,545


 


10,861


 


5,363


 


3,179


 




Operating income


 


284,349


 


236,238


 


297,451


 


319,009


 


229,733


 




Interest expense


 


(36,856


)


(36,416


)


(4,208


)


(32


)


(2,223


)




Investment and
  other income


 


3,449


 


6,697


 


11,324


 


20,736


 


9,623


 




Income before
  income taxes


 


250,942


 


206,519


 


304,567


 


339,713


 


237,133


 




Provision for
  income taxes


 


104,138


 


91,995


 


121,827


 


135,885


 


100,782


 




Net income


 


146,804


 


114,524


 


182,740


 


203,828


 


136,351


 




Preferred stock
  dividends


 


28,050


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 




Income available
  to common shareholders


 


$


118,754


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 


$


203,828


 


$


136,351


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings
  per share


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.30


 


$


1.46


 


$


1.05


 




Weighted average
  shares outstanding


 


140,414


 


139,886


 


140,088


 


139,328


 


130,090


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Diluted earnings
  per share


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.29


 


$


1.41


 


$


0.99


 




Weighted average
  shares outstanding, diluted basis


 


140,414


 


140,011


 


141,836


 


145,082


 


139,950


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dividends
  declared per common share


 


$


—


 


$


0.60


 


$


0.87


 


$


2.45


 


$


0.47


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Consolidated
  Balance Sheets Data


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Net working
  capital


 


$


371,356


 


$


(43,571


)


$


(104,364


)


$


114,211


 


$


254,146


 




Total assets


 


3,783,388


 


3,380,736


 


3,213,128


 


2,042,996


 


1,889,296


 




Long-term debt
  (including current maturities)


 


739,237


 


929,170


 


760,868


 


8,655


 


18,864


 




Shareholders’
  equity


 


1,627,876


 


1,506,024


 


1,458,804


 


1,404,143


 


1,365,676


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Operating
  Data


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Number of stores
  at end of fiscal year


 


284


 


275


 


276


 


186


 


175


 




Average store
  size (gross square footage)


 


37,000


 


36,000


 


34,000


 


34,000


 


33,000


 




Average weekly
  sales per store


 


$


549,000


 


$


570,000


 


$


617,000


 


$


593,000


 


$


537,000


 




Comparable store
  sales increase(2)


 


-3.1


%


4.9


%


7.1


%


11.0


%


12.8


%




Identical
  store sales increase(2)


 


-4.3


%


3.6


%


5.8


%


10.3


%


11.5


%



 



(1)


Fiscal years 2009, 2008, 2006 and 2005 were 52-week
  years and fiscal year 2007 was a 53-week year.




(2)


Sales of a store are
  deemed to be comparable commencing in the fifty-third full week after the
  store was opened or acquired. Identical store sales exclude sales from
  relocated stores and remodeled stores with expansions of square footage
  greater than 20% from the comparable calculation. Stores closed for eight or
  more days are excluded from the comparable and identical store base in the
  first fiscal week of closure until re-opened for a full fiscal week.



 
24





Table of
Contents
 
Item 7.    Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
 
Overview
 
General
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc. is the leading natural and organic foods
supermarket and America’s first national “Certified Organic” grocer. Our
Company mission is to promote vitality and well-being for all individuals by
supplying the highest quality, most wholesome foods available. Through our growth,
we have had a significant and positive impact on the natural and organic foods
movement throughout the United States, helping lead the industry to nationwide
acceptance. We opened our first store in Texas in 1980 and, as of September 27,
2009, we operated 284 stores: 273 stores in 38 U.S. states and the District of
Columbia; six stores in Canada; and five stores in the United Kingdom. We have
one operating segment, natural and organic foods supermarkets.
 
Our results of
operations have been and may continue to be materially affected by the timing
and number of new store openings. Stores typically open within 24 months after
entering the store development pipeline. New stores generally become profitable
during their first year of operation; although some new stores may incur
operating losses for the first several years of operation. The Company
historically has experienced lower average weekly sales in the fourth quarter,
which typically results in lower gross profit and higher direct store expenses
as a percentage of sales.
 
Sales of a store are
deemed to be comparable commencing in the fifty-third full week after the store
was opened or acquired. Stores acquired in purchase acquisitions entered the
comparable store sales base effective the fifty-third full week following the
date of the merger. Identical store sales exclude sales from relocated stores
and remodeled stores with expansions of square footage greater than 20% from
the comparable calculation to reduce the impact of square footage growth on the
comparison. Stores closed for eight or more days are excluded from the
comparable and identical store base from the first fiscal week of closure until re-opened for a full fiscal week.
 
The Company reports its
results of operations on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the last Sunday
in September. Fiscal years 2009 and 2008 were 52-week years and fiscal year
2007 was a 53-week year.
 
Wild Oats Markets Acquisition
 
Effective August 28,
2007, the Company completed the
acquisition of Wild Oats Markets, Inc. (“Wild Oats”). At the date of
acquisition, Wild Oats had 109 stores in 23 states and British Columbia, Canada
operating under four banners: Wild Oats Marketplace nationwide, Henry’s Farmers
Market (“Henry’s”) in Southern California, Sun Harvest in Texas, and Capers
Community Market in British Columbia. In connection with the acquisition of
Wild Oats, the Company separately entered into an agreement to sell certain
assets and liabilities, consisting primarily of fixed assets, inventories and
operating leases, related to all 35 Henry’s and Sun Harvest stores and a
related distribution center. As of September 27, 2009, the Company had 53
continuing Wild Oats stores, substantially all of which had been rebranded as
Whole Foods Market stores. Results of operations for fiscal year 2007 include
Wild Oats operating results for the period beginning August 28, 2007
through September 30, 2007.
 
On June 1, 2009,
the Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”) approved a settlement agreement resolving
its antitrust challenge to the Company’s acquisition of Wild Oats Markets, Inc.
Under the terms of the agreement, a third-party divestiture trustee was
appointed to market for sale until September 8, 2009: leases and related
assets for 19 non-operating former Wild Oats stores; leases and related fixed
assets (excluding inventory) for 12 operating acquired Wild Oats stores and one
operating Whole Foods Market store; and Wild Oats trademarks and other
intellectual property associated with the Wild Oats stores. The divestiture
period was extended by the FTC until March 8, 2010 for six operating and
two non-operating former Wild Oats stores as well as Wild Oats trademarks and
other intellectual property associated with the Wild Oats stores. The
divestiture period for those eight stores may be extended further only to allow
the FTC to approve any previously submitted purchase agreements. The remaining
seven operating stores and 17 non-operating stores have been retained by the
Company without further obligation to attempt to divest.
 
Economic and Industry Factors
 
Food retailing is a large, intensely competitive industry. Our
competition varies across the Company and includes but is not limited to local,
regional, national and international conventional and specialty supermarkets,
natural foods stores, warehouse membership clubs, smaller specialty stores,
farmers’ markets, and restaurants, each of which competes with us on the basis
of product selection, quality, customer service, price or a combination of
these factors. While growth has slowed from historical levels, natural and
organic food is still one of the fastest growing segments of food retailing
today.
 
Whole Foods Market experienced a challenging retail environment
beginning in the second half of fiscal year 2008 and continuing in fiscal year
2009 caused primarily by the general economic environment in the United States
and decreased consumer confidence. The Company experienced negative comparable
and identical store sales for the fiscal year for the first 
 
25





Table
of Contents
 
time in the Company’s history. However, in the fourth quarter of fiscal
year 2009, our comparable store and identical store sales trends improved for
the second quarter in a row and, after five quarters of year-over-year
declines, during the first quarter of fiscal year 2010 through November 4,
2009, comparable store and identical store sales were up 1.6% and 0.4%,
respectively. Food cost inflation, which we began to experience at increasing
levels in fiscal year 2008, began to moderate in the fourth quarter of fiscal
year 2009, likely having a negative impact on our sales, basket size and price
per item.
 
Outlook for Fiscal Year 2010
 
The Company is pleased with its sales trends for the first quarter of
fiscal year 2010 through November 4, 2009; however, increased price
investments could negatively impact our sales going forward, and with no
anticipated positive change in the economy over the short term, the Company
believes it is reasonable to expect sales results for the fiscal year in line
with or slightly better than these quarter-to-date results. For the fiscal
year, the Company expects sales growth of 5% to 8%, comparable store sales growth
of 1% to 4%, and identical store sales growth of 0% to 3%. The Company expects
to open 16 new stores, 10 of which are planned to open in the first half of the
fiscal year. While sales comparisons are expected to improve in the first half
of the year, the Company anticipates having greater difficulty leveraging
expenses due to the cost savings realized in fiscal year 2009. The Company
expects to produce cash flows from operations in excess of its capital
expenditure requirements on an annual basis.
 
Results of Operations
 
The following table sets forth the statements of
operations data of Whole Foods Market expressed as a percentage of total sales
for the fiscal years indicated:
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%




Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


65.7


 


66.0


 


65.2


 




Gross profit


 


34.3


 


34.0


 


34.8


 




Direct store
  expenses


 


26.7


 


26.5


 


26.0


 




General and
  administrative expenses


 


3.0


 


3.4


 


3.3


 




Pre-opening
  expenses


 


0.6


 


0.7


 


0.9


 




Relocation,
  store closure and lease termination costs


 


0.4


 


0.5


 


0.2


 




Operating income


 


3.5


 


3.0


 


4.5


 




Interest expense


 


(0.5


)


(0.5


)


(0.1


)




Investment and
  other income


 


—


 


0.1


 


0.2


 




Income before
  income taxes


 


3.1


 


2.6


 


4.6


 




Provision for
  income taxes


 


1.3


 


1.2


 


1.8


 




Net income


 


1.8


 


1.4


 


2.8


 




Preferred stock
  dividends


 


0.3


 


—


 


—


 




Income available
  to common shareholders


 


1.5


%


1.4


%


2.8


%



 
Figures may not sum due to
rounding.
 
Sales
 
Sales totaled
approximately $8.03 billion, $7.95 billion and $6.59 billion in fiscal years
2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively, representing increases of 1.0%, 20.7% and
17.6% over the previous fiscal years, respectively. Adjusted to reflect a
52-week period in fiscal year 2007, sales in fiscal years 2008 and 2007
increased 23.6% and 15.3% over the prior fiscal years, respectively. Sales for
all fiscal years shown reflect increases due to new stores opened and acquired.
Comparable store sales decreased approximately 3.1% in fiscal year 2009 and
increased approximately 4.9% and 7.1% in fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively.
As of September 27, 2009, there were 274 locations in the comparable store
base. The number of stores open or acquired 52-weeks or less equaled 15, 20 and
102 at the end of fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The sales
increase contributed by stores open or acquired within 52-weeks or less totaled
approximately $234.8 million, $236.1 million, and $421.8 million for fiscal
years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Identical store sales decreased 4.3%
in fiscal year 2009 and increased 3.6% and 5.8% in fiscal years 2008 and 2007,
respectively. Identical store sales in fiscal
years 2009, 2008 and 2007 exclude from the comparable calculation twelve, seven
and six store relocations, respectively, and three remodels with major
expansions during portions of each year.
 
Gross
Profit
 
Gross profit totaled
approximately $2.75 billion, $2.71 billion and $2.30 billion in fiscal years
2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Gross profit as a percentage of sales was
34.3%, 34.0% and 34.8% in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Net
LIFO inventory reserves were reduced by approximately $5.6 million in fiscal
year 2009 due to net deflation in product costs compared to net reserve
increases of approximately $12.7 million and $6.9 million in fiscal years 2008
and 2007, respectively. During fiscal year 2009, the Company realized lower
cost of goods sold as a result of better purchasing and distribution
disciplines as well as improved store-level execution, particularly in terms of
shrink control and inventory 
 
26





Table of Contents
 
management. Year over
year, these improvements more than offset higher occupancy costs as a
percentage of sales. Occupancy costs include store rental costs, property
taxes, utility costs, repair and maintenance, and property insurance.
Additionally, we made strategic and targeted price investments by taking
advantage of lower costs in certain areas, such as produce, to pass through
great values to our customers. In other areas, for example in cheese and
packaged nuts, we implemented new national programs to drive better values for
customers without sacrificing gross margin. Factors contributing to the
decrease in gross profit as a percentage of sales in fiscal year 2008 compared
to the prior fiscal year include the impact of Wild Oats, higher utility costs
and property taxes as a percentage of sales and product cost increases greater
than the Company’s increases in average retail prices. To the extent changes in
costs are not reflected in changes in retail prices or changes in retail prices
are delayed, our gross profit will be affected. Our gross profit may increase
or decrease slightly depending on the mix of sales from new stores or the
impact of weather or a host of other factors, including seasonality,
competition, inflation or deflation. Relative to existing stores, gross profit
margins tend to be lower for new stores and increase as stores mature,
reflecting lower shrink as volumes increase, as well as increasing experience
levels and operational efficiencies of the store teams.
 
Direct
Store Expenses
 
Direct store expenses totaled approximately $2.15 billion, $2.11
billion and $1.71 billion in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
Direct store expenses as a percentage of sales was approximately 26.7%, 26.5%
and 26.0% in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Increased direct
store expenses as a percentage of sales in fiscal years 2009 and 2008 reflect
higher depreciation and health care costs as a percentage of sales. Direct
store expenses as a percentage of sales tends to be higher for new stores and
decrease as stores mature, reflecting increasing operational productivity of
the store teams.
 
General and Administrative
Expenses
 
General and
administrative expenses totaled approximately $243.7 million, $270.4 million
and $217.7 million in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. General
and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales were 3.0%, 3.4% and 3.3%
in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The decrease in general and
administrative expenses in fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to
cost-containment measures implemented at the Company’s global and regional
offices beginning in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008. General and
administrative expenses for fiscal years 2009 and 2008 include FTC-related
legal costs totaling approximately $14.7 million and $2.5 million,
respectively.
 
Pre-opening Expenses
 
Pre-opening expenses
include rent expense incurred during construction of new stores and other costs
related to new store openings, including costs associated with hiring and
training personnel, supplies and other miscellaneous costs. Rent expense is
generally incurred approximately thirteen months prior to a store’s opening
date. Other pre-opening expenses are incurred primarily in the 30 days prior to
a new store opening. The Company opened 15, 20 and 21 new store locations
during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Pre-opening expenses
totaled approximately $49.2 million, $55.6 million and $59.3 million in fiscal
years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Pre-opening expenses as a percentage
of sales were 0.6%, 0.7% and 0.9% in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively.
 
Relocation, Store Closure and
Lease Termination Costs
 
Relocation
costs consist of moving costs, estimated remaining lease payments, accelerated
depreciation costs, related asset impairment, and other costs associated with
replaced facilities. Store closure costs consist of estimated remaining net
lease payments, accelerated depreciation costs, related asset impairment, and
other costs associated with closed facilities. Lease termination costs consist
of estimated remaining net lease payments for terminated leases and idle
properties and associated asset impairments. The Company relocated or closed 6,
21 and 5 store locations during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
Relocation, store closure and lease termination costs totaled approximately
$31.2 million, $36.5 million and $10.9 million in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and
2007, respectively. Relocation, store closure and lease termination costs as a
percentage of sales were 0.4%, 0.5% and 0.2% in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and
2007, respectively. Relocation, store closure and lease termination costs for
fiscal years 2009 and 2008 include charges totaling approximately $9.5 million
and $14.7 million, respectively, to increase store closure reserves for
increased estimated net lease obligations for closed stores and approximately $4.4 million and $5.5
million, respectively, in costs related to lease modifications or terminations
for stores previously in development. The Company also recorded a charge
totaling approximately $4.8 million in fiscal year 2009 to adjust the carrying
value of leases and fixed assets to fair value relating to the potential sale
of certain operating locations as part of the FTC settlement agreement.
 
Interest Expense
 
Interest expense,
net of amounts capitalized, was approximately $36.9 million, $36.4 million and
$4.2 million in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Net interest
expense in fiscal years 2009 and 2008 includes interest expense on the $700
million term loan we entered into on August 28, 2007 to finance the
acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. The Company had no amounts outstanding and
$195 million outstanding on its revolving line of credit at September 27,
2009 and September 28, 2008, respectively.
 
27





Table
of Contents
 
Investment and Other Income
 
Investment and other income includes investment gains and losses,
interest income, rental income and other income totaling approximately $3.4
million, $6.7 million and $11.3 million in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively. The decreases in investment and other income in fiscal years 2009
and 2008 primarily resulted from lower average short-term return rates on
investments and lower average investment balances in fiscal year 2008.
 
Income
Taxes
 
Income taxes resulted in an effective tax rate of approximately 41.5%,
44.5% and 40.0% in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The increase
in our effective tax rate for fiscal year 2008 resulted primarily from the
repatriation of cash from the Company’s Canadian subsidiary.
 
Share-Based Payments
 
Share-based payment expense before income taxes recognized during
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 was approximately $12.8 million, $10.5 million
and $13.2 million, respectively. Share-based payment expense was included in
the following line items on the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the
periods indicated (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


$


439


 


$


233


 


$


475


 




Direct store
  expenses


 


7,152


 


5,300


 


7,093


 




General and
  administrative expenses


 


5,204


 


4,972


 


5,607


 




Share-based
  payment expense before income taxes


 


12,795


 


10,505


 


13,175


 




Income tax
  benefit


 


(5,222


)


(4,815


)


(4,114


)




Net
  share-based payment expense


 


$


7,573


 


$


5,690


 


$


9,061


 



 
The Company intends to keep its broad-based stock option program in
place, but also intends to limit the number of shares granted in any one year
so that annual earnings per share dilution from share-based payment expense
will not exceed 10%. The Company believes this strategy is best aligned with
its stakeholder philosophy because it limits future earnings per share dilution
from options and at the same time retains the broad-based stock option plan,
which the Company believes is important to team member morale, its unique
corporate culture and its success.
 
Liquidity and Capital Resources
 
The Company had cash and
cash equivalents totaling approximately $430.1 million and $30.5 million and
restricted cash totaling approximately $71.0 million and $0.6 million at September 27,
2009 and September 28, 2008, respectively. The increase in restricted cash
at September 27, 2009 primarily relates to cash invested as collateral to
support a portion of our projected workers’ compensation obligations that were
previously collateralized by an outstanding letter of credit.
 
We generated cash flows from operating activities of approximately
$587.7 million, $335.0 million and $391.5 million in fiscal years 2009, 2008
and 2007, respectively. Cash flows from operating activities resulted primarily
from our net income plus non-cash expenses and changes in operating working
capital.
 
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $386.3 million,
$372.7 million and $890.4 million for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively. For fiscal year 2007, net cash used in investing activities
includes approximately $596.2 million paid for the purchase of Wild Oats. Our
principal historical capital requirements have been the funding of the
development or acquisition of new stores and acquisition of property and
equipment for existing stores. The required cash investment for new stores
varies depending on the size of the new store, geographic location, degree of
work performed by the landlord and complexity of site development issues.
Capital expenditures for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 totaled approximately
$314.6 million, $529.5 million and $524.5 million, respectively, of which
approximately $248.0 million, $357.5 million and $388.8 million, respectively,
was for new store development and approximately $66.6 million, $172.0 million
and $135.8 million, respectively, was for remodels and other property, plant
and equipment expenditures. For fiscal year 2010, the Company expects capital
expenditures to be in the range of approximately $350 million to $400 million.
 
28





Table
of Contents
 
The following table provides information about the Company’s store
development activities:
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Properties


 


Total


 




 


 


Stores Opened


 


Stores Opened


 


Tendered


 


Leases Signed


 




 


 


During Fiscal


 


During Fiscal


 


as of


 


as of


 




 


 


Year 2008


 


Year 2009


 


November 4, 2009


 


November 4, 2009(1)


 




Number of stores
  (including relocations)


 


20


 


15


 


18


 


53


 




Number of
  relocations


 


6


 


6


 


1


 


8


 




Number of lease
  acquisitions, ground leases and owned properties


 


4


 


4


 


4


 


4


 




New areas


 


3


 


1


 


4


 


7


 




Average store
  size (gross square feet)


 


53,000


 


53,500


 


43,500


 


44,800


 




Total square
  footage


 


1,060,700


 


801,800


 


783,800


 


2,409,700


 




Average tender
  period in months


 


9.7


 


12.6


 


 


 


 


 




Average
  pre-opening expense per store


 


$


2.5 million


 


$


3.0 million


 


 


 


 


 




Average
  pre-opening rent per store


 


$


1.1
  million


 


$


1.3
  million


 


 


 


 


 



 
(1) Includes leased properties tendered
 
The following table
provides information about the Company’s historical store growth:
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Stores
  at beginning of fiscal year


 


275


 


276


 


186


 




Stores
  opened


 


15


 


20


 


21


 




Acquired
  stores


 


—


 


—


 


109


 




Divested
  stores


 


—


 


—


 


(35


)




Relocations
  and closures


 


(6


)


(21


)


(5


)




Stores
  at end of fiscal year


 


284


 


275


 


276


 




Remodels
  with major expansions(1)


 


2


 


1


 


2


 




Total
  gross square footage at end of fiscal year


 


10,566,000


 


9,895,000


 


9,312,000


 



 
(1) Defined as remodels
with expansions of square footage greater than 20% completed during the fiscal
year.
 
We are focused on the right sized store for each location and, since
announcing in the third quarter of 2007 our intent to decrease the size of
several leases in development, we have downsized 14 leases by an average of
12,000 square feet each. We also have terminated 16 leases for stores in
development totaling approximately 846,000 square feet, or an average of 53,000
square feet per store. In addition, we are building out a smaller footprint
(averaging 15,000 square feet each) at seven locations, two of which opened in
fiscal year 2009. We currently operate 12 stores in excess of 65,000 gross
square feet and have an additional five stores of that size in development, two
of which are relocations.
 
The Company has opened three stores and closed one store in fiscal year
2010 as of November 4, 2009. The following table provides additional
information about the Company’s estimated store openings for the remainder of
fiscal years 2010 through 2013 based on the Company’s current development
pipeline. These openings reflect estimated tender dates which are subject to
change and do not incorporate any potential new leases, terminations or square
footage reductions:
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Average


 


 


 


Ending


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


New Store


 


Ending


 


Square


 




 


 


Total


 


 


 


Square


 


Square


 


Footage


 




 


 


Openings


 


Relocations


 


Footage


 


Footage(1)


 


Growth


 




Remaining fiscal
  year 2010 stores in development


 


13


 


—


 


44,600


 


11,216,100


 


6.2


%




Fiscal year 2011
  stores in development


 


17


 


4


 


39,600


 


11,772,300


 


5.0


%




Fiscal year 2012
  stores in development


 


15


 


2


 


46,900


 


12,426,600


 


5.6


%




Fiscal year 2013
  stores in development


 


8


 


2


 


53,200


 


12,781,200


 


2.9


%




Total


 


53


 


8


 


44,800


 


 


 


 


 



 



(1)


Reflects openings and closures in fiscal year 2010
  through November 4, 2009 and one expansion in development in fiscal year
  2011.



 
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $199.5
million, $69.8 million and $494.1 million in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively. Proceeds from the exercise of stock options by team members are
driven by a number of factors, including fluctuations in our stock price, and
totaled approximately $4.3 million, $18.0 million and $54.4 million in fiscal
years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
 
29





Table of Contents
 
During fiscal year 2007,
the Company entered into a $700 million, five-year term loan agreement to
finance the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. The loan, which is secured by a
pledge of substantially all of the stock in our subsidiaries, bears interest at
our option of the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin,
currently 0.75%, or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, currently 1.75%, based on
the Company’s Moody’s and S&P rating. These applicable margins are
currently the maximum allowed under these agreements. The interest period on
LIBOR borrowings may range from one to six months at our option. The Company
recorded approximately $3.4 million in debt origination fees for the term loan
which are being amortized on a straight-line basis over the life of the loan.
During the first quarter of fiscal year 2009, as a result of downgrades to our
corporate credit ratings and as called for in the loan agreement, the
participating banks obtained security interests in certain of the Company’s
assets to collateralize amounts outstanding under the term loan. The term loan
agreement contains certain affirmative covenants including maintenance of
certain financial ratios and certain negative covenants including limitations
on additional indebtedness and payments as defined in the agreement. No further
material restrictive covenants or limitations on additional indebtedness and
payments have been imposed as a result of the downgrades to our corporate credit
ratings. At September 27, 2009, we were in compliance with all applicable
debt covenants.
 
The Company also
has outstanding a $350 million revolving line of credit, which is secured by a
pledge of substantially all of the stock in our subsidiaries, that extends to
2012. The credit agreement contains certain affirmative covenants including
maintenance of certain financial ratios and certain negative covenants
including limitations on additional indebtedness and payments as defined in the
agreement. At September 27, 2009, we were in compliance with all
applicable debt covenants. All outstanding amounts borrowed under this
agreement bear interest at our option of the ABR plus an applicable margin,
currently 0.875%, or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, currently 1.875%, based
on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P rating. These applicable margins are
currently the maximum allowed under these agreements. During the first quarter
of fiscal year 2009, as a result of downgrades to our corporate credit ratings
and as called for in the loan agreement, the participating banks obtained
security interests in certain of the Company’s assets to collateralize amounts
outstanding under the revolving credit facility. No further material
restrictive covenants or limitations on additional indebtedness and payments
have been imposed as a result of the downgrades to our corporate credit
ratings. Commitment fees on the undrawn amount, reduced by outstanding letters
of credit, are payable under this agreement. At September 28, 2008 the
Company had $195 million drawn under this agreement. During the first quarter
of fiscal year 2009, the Company repaid all amounts outstanding and no amounts
were drawn under this agreement at September 27, 2009. The amount
available to the Company under the agreement was effectively reduced to $335.2
million and $75.9 million by outstanding letters of credit totaling
approximately $14.8 million and $79.1 million at September 27, 2009 and September 28,
2008, respectively.
 
Interest paid
during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 totaled approximately $43.7 million,
$36.2 million and $4.6 million, respectively. The increase in interest paid in
fiscal years 2009 and 2008 is due to interest costs associated with the $700
million term loan. Interest paid in fiscal year 2007 includes interest costs
associated with the $700 million term loan agreement for the period from August 28,
2007 through September 30, 2007. The Company expects interest expense, net
of investment and other income, to range from approximately $35 million to $40
million in fiscal year 2010.
 
The Company assumed convertible debentures totaling approximately
$115.0 million in the Wild Oats acquisition, of which approximately $94.2
million was paid off during fiscal year 2007 and approximately $21.8 million,
which included a related conversion premium totaling approximately $0.9
million, was paid off during fiscal year 2008. Approximately 250 Whole Foods
Market zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures were converted at the
option of the holders to approximately 6,000 shares of Company common stock
during fiscal year 2008. We had outstanding convertible subordinated debentures
which had a carrying amount of approximately $2.7 million at September 28,
2008. In fiscal year 2009, the Company redeemed all remaining debentures at a
redemption price equal to the issue price plus accrued original issue discount
totaling approximately $2.7 million.
 
On December 2,
2008, the Company issued 425,000 shares of Series A 8% Redeemable,
Convertible Exchangeable Participating Preferred Stock, $0.01 par value per
share (“Series A Preferred Stock”) to affiliates of Leonard Green &
Partners, L.P., for approximately $413.1 million, net of approximately $11.9
million in closing and issuance costs. Subsequent to the end of fiscal year
2009, on October 23, 2009 the Company announced its intention to call all
425,000 outstanding shares of the Series A Preferred Stock for redemption
in accordance with the terms governing such Series A Preferred Stock.
Subject to conversion of the Series A Preferred Stock by its holders, the
Company planned to redeem such Series A Preferred Stock on November 27,
2009 at a price per share equal to $1,000 plus accrued and unpaid dividends. In
accordance with the terms governing the Series A Preferred Stock, at any
time prior to the redemption date, the Series A Preferred Stock could be
converted by the holders thereof. On November 26, 2009 the holders
converted all 425,000 outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock into
approximately 29.7 million shares of common stock of the Company. During fiscal
year 2009, the Company paid cash dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock
totaling approximately $19.8 million.
 
30





Table
of Contents
 
The Company is committed under certain capital leases for rental of
equipment, buildings, and land and certain operating leases for rental of
facilities and equipment. These leases expire or become subject to renewal
clauses at various dates from 2010 to 2054.
 
The following table shows payments due by period on contractual
obligations as of September 27, 2009 (in thousands):
 



 


 


 


 


Less than 1


 


1-3


 


3-5


 


More than 5


 




 


 


Total


 


Year


 


Years


 


Years


 


Years


 




Long term debt
  obligations


 


$


700,000


 


$


—


 


$


700,000


 


$


—


 


$


—


 




Estimated
  interest on long term debt obligations


 


64,491


 


35,904


 


28,587


 


—


 


—


 




Capital lease
  obligations (including interest)


 


39,040


 


2,066


 


4,153


 


4,182


 


28,639


 




Operating lease
  obligations(1)


 


5,650,318


 


265,408


 


591,489


 


619,125


 


4,174,296


 




Total


 


$


6,453,849


 


$


303,378


 


$


1,324,229


 


$


623,307


 


$


4,202,935


 



 
(1)Amounts exclude taxes, insurance and other related expenses.
 
At September 27, 2009, the company had gross unrecognized tax
benefits totaling approximately $18.1 million including interest and
penalties.  The Company believes it is reasonably possible that tax audit
resolutions could reduce its unrecognized tax benefits by $0.5 million in the
next 12 months.  These amounts have been excluded from the
contractual obligations table because a reasonably reliable estimate of the
period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities cannot be
determined due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future
cash outflows associated with these liabilities.
 
We periodically make other commitments and become subject to other
contractual obligations that we believe to be routine in nature and incidental
to the operation of the business. Management believes that such routine
commitments and contractual obligations do not have a material impact on our
business, financial condition or results of operations.
 
Following is a summary of
dividends declared on common shares in fiscal year 2008 (in thousands, except
per share amounts):
 



Date of


 


Dividend per


 


Date of


 


Date of


 


Total


 




Declaration


 


Common Share


 


Record


 


Payment


 


Amount


 




November 20,
  2007


 


$


0.20


 


January 11, 2008


 


January 22, 2008


 


$


27,901


 




March 10,
  2008


 


0.20


 


April 11, 2008


 


April 22, 2008


 


28,041


 




June 11,
  2008


 


0.20


 


July 11, 2008


 


July 22, 2008


 


28,057


 

















 
During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, the Company’s Board of
Directors suspended the quarterly cash dividend on common shares for the
foreseeable future.
 
On July 31, 2008, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a $100
million increase in the Company’s stock repurchase program, bringing the total
authorization to $400 million through November 8, 2009. During fiscal year
2008, the Company retired approximately 4.5 million shares held in treasury
that had been repurchased for a total of approximately $200 million. The
Company’s remaining authorization under the stock repurchase program at September 27,
2009 was approximately $200 million. On November 8, 2009, the Company’s
stock repurchase program expired in accordance with its terms.
 
The effect of exchange
rate changes on cash included in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
resulted in decreases in cash and cash equivalents totaling approximately $1.3
million and $1.6 million for fiscal years 2009 and 2008, respectively,
reflecting the relative weakening of the Canadian and United Kingdom currencies
compared to the U.S. dollar during these periods. For fiscal year 2007, the
effect of exchange rate changes on cash resulted in an increase in cash and
cash equivalents totaling approximately $2.5 million.
 
Our principal historical
sources of liquidity have been cash generated by operations, available cash and
cash equivalents, short-term investments and amounts available under our revolving
line of credit. Absent any significant change in market condition, we expect
planned expansion and other anticipated working capital and capital expenditure
requirements for the next twelve months will be funded by these sources. There
can be no assurance, however, that the Company will continue to generate cash
flows at or above current levels or that our revolving line of credit and other
sources of capital will be available to us in the future.
 
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
 
Our
off-balance sheet arrangements at September 27, 2009 consist of operating
leases disclosed in the above contractual obligations table and the undrawn
portion of our revolving credit facility discussed in Note 8 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements, “Long-Term Debt,” in “Item 8. Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data.” We have no other off-balance 
 
31





Table of
Contents
 
sheet
arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a material
current or future effect on our consolidated financial statements or financial
condition.
 
Critical
Accounting Policies
 
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues,
expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. Actual
amounts may differ from these estimates. We base our estimates on historical
experience and on various other assumptions and factors that we believe to be
reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate the
continued appropriateness of our accounting policies and resulting estimates to
make adjustments we consider appropriate under the facts and circumstances.
 
We have chosen accounting policies that we believe are appropriate to
report accurately and fairly our operating results and financial position, and
we apply those accounting policies in a consistent manner. Our significant
accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 to the consolidated financial
statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We believe
that the following accounting policies are the most critical in the preparation
of our financial statements because they involve the most difficult, subjective
or complex judgments about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
 
Inventory Valuation
 
We value our
inventories at the lower of cost or market. Cost was determined using the
last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method for approximately 93.6% and 94.0% of
inventories at September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008,
respectively. Under the LIFO method, the cost assigned to items sold is based
on the cost of the most recent items purchased. As a result, the costs of the
first items purchased remain in inventory and are used to value ending
inventory. The excess of estimated current costs over LIFO carrying value, or
LIFO reserve, was approximately $27.1 million and $32.7 million at September 27,
2009 and September 28, 2008, respectively. 
Costs for remaining inventories are determined by the first-in,
first-out (“FIFO”) method. Cost was determined using the retail method and the
item cost method for inventories in fiscal years 2009 and 2008. Under the
retail method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the resulting gross
margins are determined by counting each item in inventory, then applying a
cost-to-retail ratio for various groupings of similar items to the retail value
of inventories. Inherent in the retail inventory method calculations are
certain management judgments and estimates which could impact the ending
inventory valuation at cost as well as the resulting gross margins. The item
cost method involves counting each item in inventory, assigning costs to each
of these items based on the actual purchase costs (net of vendor allowances) of
each item and recording the actual cost of items sold. The item cost method of
accounting enables management to more precisely manage inventory and purchasing
levels when compared to the retail method of accounting.
 
Our cost-to-retail
ratios contain uncertainties because the calculation requires management to
make assumptions and to apply judgment regarding inventory mix, inventory
spoilage and inventory shrink. Because of the significance of the judgments and
estimation processes, it is likely that materially different amounts could be
recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances
were to change. A 10% difference in our cost-to-retail ratios at September 27,
2009, would have affected net income by approximately $3.3 million for fiscal
year 2009.
 
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
 
Goodwill consists of the excess of cost of acquired enterprises over
the sum of the amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired less
liabilities assumed. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually at the
beginning of the Company’s fourth fiscal quarter, or more frequently if
impairment indicators arise, on a reporting unit level. We allocate goodwill to
one reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. We determine fair value
utilizing both a market value method and discounted projected future cash flows
compared to our carrying value for the purpose of identifying impairment. Our
annual impairment review requires extensive use of accounting judgment and
financial estimates. Application of alternative assumptions and definitions,
such as reviewing goodwill for impairment at a different organizational level,
could produce significantly different results. Because of the significance of
the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different
amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying
circumstances were to change.
 
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Long-Lived
Assets to be Disposed of
 
We
evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the
carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted cash flows expected to be
generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the
impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying
amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be
disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less
costs to sell. Application of alternative assumptions, such as changes in
estimate of future cash flows, could produce significantly different results.
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is
likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different
assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change.
 
32





Table
of Contents
 
Derivative Instruments
 
The Company utilizes derivative financial instruments to hedge its
exposure to changes in interest rates. All derivative financial instruments are
recorded on the balance sheet at their respective fair value. The Company does
not use financial instruments or derivatives for any trading or other
speculative purposes.
 
During fiscal year 2008, the Company entered into a three-year interest
rate swap agreement with a notional amount of $490 million to effectively fix
the interest rate on $490 million of the term loan at 4.718%, excluding the
applicable margin and associated fees. The interest rate swap was designated as
a cash flow hedge. The hedge effectiveness is measured by comparing the change
in fair value of the hedge item with the change in fair value of the swap. The effective
portion of the gain or loss of the hedge is recorded on the Consolidated
Balance Sheets under the caption “Accumulated other comprehensive income
(loss).” Any ineffective portion of the hedge, as well as amounts not included
in the assessment of effectiveness, is recorded on the accompanying
Consolidated Statements of Operations under the caption “Interest expense.”
 
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes,
it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used
different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. A 10%
change in interest rates underlying our interest rate swap would have affected
the value of the swap by approximately $0.3 million at September 27, 2009.
 
Insurance and Self-Insurance Liabilities
 
The Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to
provide for the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general
liability, property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle
liability and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the
risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering
historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other
actuarial assumptions. While we believe that our assumptions are appropriate,
the estimated accruals for these liabilities could be significantly affected if
future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical
trends.
 
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology
used to establish our insurance and self-insured liabilities during the past
three fiscal years.
 
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes,
it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used
different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. A 10%
change in our insurance and self-insured liabilities at September 27,
2009, would have affected net income by approximately $5.0 million for fiscal
year 2009.
 
Reserves
for Closed Properties
 
The Company
maintains reserves for retail stores and other properties that are no longer
being utilized in current operations. The Company provides for closed property
operating lease liabilities using a discount rate to calculate the present
value of the remaining non-cancelable lease payments and lease termination fees
after the closing date, net of estimated subtenant income. The closed property
lease liabilities are expected to be paid over the remaining lease terms, which
generally range from one to 15 years. The Company estimates subtenant income
and future cash flows based on the Company’s experience and knowledge of the
area in which the closed property is located, the Company’s previous efforts to
dispose of similar assets, existing economic conditions and when necessary
utilizes local real estate brokers.
 
Adjustments to closed property reserves primarily relate to changes in
estimated subtenant income or actual exit costs differing from original
estimates. Adjustments are made for changes in estimates in the period in which
the changes become known.
 
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes,
it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used
different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. A 10%
change in our closed property reserves at September 27, 2009, would have
affected net income by a maximum of approximately $4.0 million for fiscal year
2009. Reductions in reserves for closed properties established as part of the
Wild Oats Markets acquisition will be applied against goodwill and will not
impact earnings.
 
Share-Based Payments
 
The Company maintains several share-based incentive plans. We grant
options to purchase common stock under our Whole Foods Market 2009 Stock
Incentive Plan, which was approved at our annual shareholders’ meeting on March 16,
2009 and replaces the Whole Foods Market 2007 Stock Incentive Plan. All options
outstanding are governed by the original terms and conditions of the
grants.  Options are granted at an option
price equal to the market value of the stock at the grant date and are
generally exercisable ratably over a four-year period beginning one year from
grant date and have a five or seven year term. The grant date is established
once the Company’s Board of Directors approves the grant and all key terms have
been 
 
33





Table
of Contents
 
determined. The exercise prices of our stock option grants are the
closing price on the grant date. Stock option grant terms and conditions are
communicated to team members within a relatively short period of time. Our
Company generally approves one primary stock option grant annually, occurring
during a trading window.
 
Our Company offers a
team member stock purchase plan to all full-time team members with a minimum of
400 hours of service. Participating team members may purchase our common stock
through payroll deductions. At our 2007 annual meeting, shareholders approved a
new Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (“TMSPP”) which became effective on April 1,
2007. The TMSPP replaces all previous stock purchase plans and provides for a
5% discount on the shares purchase date market value which meets the
share-based payment, “Safe Harbor” provisions, and therefore is
non-compensatory. As a result, no future compensation expense will be
recognized for our employee stock purchase plan. Under the previous plans, participating
team members could elect to purchase unrestricted shares at 100% of market
value or restricted shares at 85% of market value on the purchase date.
 
The Company uses the Black-Scholes multiple option pricing model which
requires extensive use of accounting judgment and financial estimates,
including estimates of the expected term team members will retain their vested
stock options before exercising them, the estimated volatility of the Company’s
common stock price over the expected term, and the number of options that will
be forfeited prior to the completion of their vesting requirements. The related
share-based payment expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the
vesting period. The tax savings resulting from tax deductions in excess of
expense reflected in the Company’s financial statements are reflected as a
financing cash flow. Application of alternative assumptions could produce
significantly different estimates of the fair value of share-based payment
expense and consequently, the related amounts recognized in the Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
 
The Company intends to keep its broad-based stock option program in
place, but also intends to limit the number of shares granted in any one year
so that annual earnings per share dilution from share-based payment expense
will not exceed 10%.
 
We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a
material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to determine
share-based payment expense. However, if actual results are not consistent with
our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes in share-based
payment expense that could be material.
 
Because of the
significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that
materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions
or if the underlying circumstances were to change. A 10% change in our
share-based payment expense would have affected net income by approximately
$0.7 million for fiscal year 2009.
 
Income Taxes
 
We recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities by applying
statutory tax rates in effect at the balance sheet date to differences between
the book basis and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets
and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to
taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected
to reverse. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted to reflect changes
in tax laws or rates in the period that includes the enactment date.
Significant accounting judgment is required in determining the provision for
income taxes and related accruals, deferred tax assets and liabilities. In the
ordinary course of business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate
tax outcome is uncertain. In addition, we are subject to periodic audits and
examinations by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other state and local
taxing authorities. Although we believe that our estimates are reasonable,
actual results could differ from these estimates.
 
The Company recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position
only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on
examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the
position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a
position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater
than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
 
To
the extent we prevail in matters for which reserves have been established, or
are required to pay amounts in excess of our reserves, our effective income tax
rate in a given financial statement period could be materially affected. An
unfavorable tax settlement would require use of our cash and would result in an
increase in our effective income tax rate in the period of resolution. A
favorable tax settlement would be recognized as a reduction in our effective
income tax rate in the period of resolution.
 
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
 
Recent Accounting Pronouncements are included in “Item 8. Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data” Note 2 to the consolidated financial
statements, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
 
34





Table of Contents
 
Disclaimer on
Forward-Looking Statements
 
Except for the historical
information contained herein, the matters discussed in this analysis are
forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including but
not limited to general business conditions, the timely development and opening
of new stores, the integration of acquired stores, the impact of competition
and changes in government regulation. For a discussion of these and other risks
and uncertainties that may affect our business, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
The Company does not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking
statements.
 
Item 7A.   Quantitative
and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
 
We are exposed to interest rate changes and changes in
market values of our investments and long-term debt. We do not use financial
instruments for trading or other speculative purposes. We are also exposed to
foreign exchange fluctuations on our foreign subsidiaries.
 
Interest Rate Risk
 
We seek to minimize the
risks from interest rate fluctuations through ongoing evaluation of the
composition of our investments and long-term debt.
 
The Company holds money market fund investments that
are classified as cash equivalents and restricted cash. These investments are
short-term in nature, and therefore changes in interest rates would not have a
material impact on the valuation of these investments. Interest rate
fluctuations would affect the amount of interest income earned on these
investments.  We had cash equivalent
investments and restricted cash investments totaling approximately $439.0
million and $70.4 million at September 27, 2009, respectively.
 
We have outstanding a
$700 million, five-year term loan agreement. The loan bears interest at our
option of the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin or LIBOR
plus an applicable margin, based on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P ratings.
At September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008, the loan bore interest
based on LIBOR. We believe our term loans do not give rise to significant fair
value risk because they are variable interest rate loans with revolving
maturities which reflect market changes to interest rates and contain variable
risk premiums based on the Company’s corporate ratings. During fiscal year
2008, the Company entered into a three-year interest rate swap agreement with a
notional amount of $490 million to fix the interest rate at 4.718%, excluding
applicable margin and associated fees, to help manage our exposure to interest
rate fluctuations.
 
We also have outstanding
a $250 million revolving line of credit that extends to 2012. The credit
agreement contained an accordion feature, which the company exercised during
fiscal year 2008, to increase the revolving credit facility to $350 million.
All outstanding amounts under this agreement bear interest at our option of the
ABR plus an applicable margin or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, based on the
Company’s Moody’s and S&P ratings. At September 27, 2009, no amounts
were drawn. At September 28, 2008, $26 million was based on ABR and $169
million was based on LIBOR. We believe our line of credit borrowings do not
give rise to significant fair value risk because these borrowings have revolving
maturities and contain variable risk premiums based on the Company’s corporate
credit ratings.
 
Additional term loan and
line of credit information for September 27, 2009 and September 28,
2008 are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 




Term loan
  agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding loan
  balance


 


$


700,000


 


$


700,000


 




Fair value of
  swap agreement (asset) liability


 


$


20,588


 


$


12,451


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin on non-swap portion of loan


 


0.253


%


2.469


%




Interest rate
  swap fixed interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


4.718


%


4.718


%




Applicable
  margin — LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.750


%


1.375


%




Applicable
  margin — ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.750


%


0.375


%




 


 


 


 


 


 




Line of credit
  agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding line
  of credit balance


 


$


—


 


$


195,000


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


n/a


 


4.221


%




Applicable
  margin — LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.875


%


1.500


%




Applicable
  margin — ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.875


%


0.500


%



 
During fiscal year 2009
and due to downgrades in our corporate credit rating by Moody’s and S&P,
the margin applicable to our term loan increased to 0.75% and 1.75% on ABR
borrowings and LIBOR borrowings, respectively. Additionally, the 
 
35





Table of Contents
 
margin applicable to our
revolving credit facility increased to 0.875% and 1.875% on ABR borrowings and
LIBOR borrowings, respectively. These applicable margins are currently the
maximum allowed under these agreements. Also, as a result of these downgrades
and as called for in the loan agreement, the participating banks obtained
security interests in certain of the Company’s assets to collateralize amounts
outstanding under the term loan and revolving credit facility. No further
material restrictive covenants or limitations on additional indebtedness and
payments have been imposed as a result of the downgrades to our corporate
credit ratings.
 
Foreign Currency Risk
 
The Company is exposed to
foreign currency exchange risk. We own and operate six stores in Canada and
five stores in the United Kingdom. Sales made from the Canadian and United
Kingdom stores are made in exchange for Canadian dollars and Great Britain
pounds, respectively. The Company does not currently hedge against the risk of
exchange rate fluctuations.
 
36





Table of
Contents
 
Item 8.      Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data.
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
 



 


 


Page




 


 


Number




Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting
  Firm


 


38




Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting
  Firm on Internal Control over Financial Reporting


 


39




Consolidated
  Balance Sheets at September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008


 


40




Consolidated Statements of Operations for the fiscal
  years ended September 27, 2009, September 28, 2008 and
  September 30, 2007


 


41




Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and
  Comprehensive Income for the fiscal years ended September 27, 2009,
  September 28, 2008 and September 30, 2007


 


42




Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal
  years ended September 27, 2009, September 28, 2008 and
  September 30, 2007


 


43




Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements


 


44



 
37





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting
Firm
 
To the Board of
Directors and Shareholders
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
 
We have audited
the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Whole Foods Market, Inc.
as of September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008, and the related
consolidated statements of operations, shareholders’ equity and comprehensive
income, and cash flows for each of the three fiscal years in the period ended September 27,
2009. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s
management.  Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
 
We conducted our audits
in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the
audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An
audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
 
In our opinion,
the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the consolidated financial position of Whole Foods Market, Inc.
at September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008, and the consolidated
results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three fiscal
years in the period ended September 27, 2009, in conformity with U.S. generally
accepted accounting principles.
 
As discussed in
Note 2 to the financial statements, in 2008 the Company changed its method of
accounting for income tax uncertainties.
 
We also have
audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States), the effectiveness of Whole Foods Market, Inc.’s
internal control over financial reporting as of September 27, 2009, based
on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework issued by
the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our
report dated November 27, 2009 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 
 
/s/ Ernst &
Young
Austin, Texas
November 27,
2009
 
38





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
To the Board of
Directors and Shareholders
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
 
We have audited
Whole Foods Market, Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as of
September 27, 2009, based on criteria established in Internal Control -
Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
Treadway Commission (the COSO criteria). Whole Foods Market, Inc.’s
management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over
financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management’s
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on the company’s internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit.
 
We conducted our
audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective
internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control
over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists,
testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control
based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we
considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
A company’s
internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain
to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors
of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention
or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the
company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
 
Because of its
inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent
or detect misstatements.  Also,
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.
 
In our opinion,
Whole Foods Market, Inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of September 27, 2009, based
on the COSO criteria.
 
We have also
audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated balance sheets of Whole Foods
Market, Inc. as of September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008,
and the related consolidated statements of operations, shareholders’ equity and
comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the three fiscal years in the
period ended September 27, 2009 of Whole Foods Market, Inc. and our
report dated November 27, 2009 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 
 
/s/ Ernst &
Young
Austin, Texas
November 27,
2009
 
39





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(In
thousands)
September 27,
2009 and September 28, 2008
 



Assets


 


2009


 


2008


 




Current
  assets:


 


 


 


 


 




Cash
  and cash equivalents


 


$


430,130


 


$


30,534


 




Restricted
  cash


 


71,023


 


617


 




Accounts
  receivable


 


104,731


 


115,424


 




Merchandise
  inventories


 


310,602


 


327,452


 




Prepaid
  expenses and other current assets


 


51,137


 


68,150


 




Deferred
  income taxes


 


87,757


 


80,429


 




Total
  current assets


 


1,055,380


 


622,606


 




Property
  and equipment, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization


 


1,897,853


 


1,900,117


 




Goodwill


 


658,254


 


659,559


 




Intangible
  assets, net of accumulated amortization


 


73,035


 


78,499


 




Deferred
  income taxes


 


91,000


 


109,002


 




Other
  assets


 


7,866


 


10,953


 




Total
  assets


 


$


3,783,388


 


$


3,380,736


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity


 


 


 


 


 




Current
  liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 




Current
  installments of long-term debt and capital lease obligations


 


$


389


 


$


380


 




Accounts
  payable


 


189,597


 


183,134


 




Accrued
  payroll, bonus and other benefits due team members


 


207,983


 


196,233


 




Dividends
  payable


 


8,217


 


—


 




Other
  current liabilities


 


277,838


 


286,430


 




Total
  current liabilities


 


684,024


 


666,177


 




Long-term
  debt and capital lease obligations, less current installments


 


738,848


 


928,790


 




Deferred
  lease liabilities


 


250,326


 


199,635


 




Other
  long-term liabilities


 


69,262


 


80,110


 




Total
  liabilities


 


1,742,460


 


1,874,712


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




Series A
  redeemable preferred stock, $0.01 par value, 425 and no shares authorized,
  issued and outstanding in 2009 and 2008, respectively


 


413,052


 


—


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




Shareholders’
  equity:


 


 


 


 


 




Common
  stock, no par value, 300,000 shares authorized; 140,542 and 140,286 shares
  issued and outstanding in 2009 and 2008, respectively


 


1,283,028


 


1,266,141


 




Accumulated
  other comprehensive income (loss)


 


(13,367


)


422


 




Retained
  earnings


 


358,215


 


239,461


 




Total
  shareholders’ equity


 


1,627,876


 


1,506,024


 




Commitments
  and contingencies


 


 


 


 


 




Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity


 


$


3,783,388


 


$


3,380,736


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of
these consolidated financial statements.
 
40





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Statements
of Operations
(In
thousands, except per share amounts)
Fiscal
years ended September 27, 2009, September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Sales


 


$


8,031,620


 


$


7,953,912


 


$


6,591,773


 




Cost
  of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


5,277,310


 


5,247,207


 


4,295,170


 




Gross
  profit


 


2,754,310


 


2,706,705


 


2,296,603


 




Direct
  store expenses


 


2,145,809


 


2,107,940


 


1,711,229


 




General
  and administrative expenses


 


243,749


 


270,428


 


217,743


 




Pre-opening
  expenses


 


49,218


 


55,554


 


59,319


 




Relocation,
  store closure and lease termination costs


 


31,185


 


36,545


 


10,861


 




Operating
  income


 


284,349


 


236,238


 


297,451


 




Interest
  expense


 


(36,856


)


(36,416


)


(4,208


)




Investment
  and other income


 


3,449


 


6,697


 


11,324


 




Income
  before income taxes


 


250,942


 


206,519


 


304,567


 




Provision
  for income taxes


 


104,138


 


91,995


 


121,827


 




Net
  income


 


146,804


 


114,524


 


182,740


 




Preferred
  stock dividends


 


28,050


 


—


 


—


 




Income
  available to common shareholders


 


$


118,754


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic
  earnings per share


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.30


 




Weighted
  average shares outstanding


 


140,414


 


139,886


 


140,088


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Diluted
  earnings per share


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.29


 




Weighted
  average shares outstanding, diluted basis


 


140,414


 


140,011


 


141,836


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dividends declared per common share


 


$


—


 


$


0.60


 


$


0.87


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of
these consolidated financial statements.
 
41





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Statements
of Shareholders’ Equity and Comprehensive Income
(In
thousands)
Fiscal
years ended September 27, 2009, September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Accumulated


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


Common


 


Other


 


 


 


Total


 




 


 


Shares


 


Common


 


Stock in


 


Comprehensive


 


Retained


 


Shareholders’


 




 


 


Outstanding


 


Stock


 


Treasury


 


Income (Loss)


 


Earnings


 


Equity


 




Balances
  at September 24, 2006


 


139,607


 


$


1,147,872


 


$


(99,964


)


$


6,975


 


$


349,260


 


$


1,404,143


 




Net
  income


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


182,740


 


182,740


 




Foreign
  currency translation adjustments


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


8,824


 


—


 


8,824


 




Change
  in unrealized loss on investments, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(77


)


—


 


(77


)




Comprehensive
  income


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


191,487


 




Dividends
  ($0.87 per common share)


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(121,802


)


(121,802


)




Issuance
  of common stock pursuant to team member stock plans


 


1,961


 


52,925


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


52,925


 




Purchase
  of treasury stock


 


(2,542


)


—


 


(99,997


)


—


 


—


 


(99,997


)




Excess
  tax benefit related to exercise of team member stock options


 


—


 


13,187


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


13,187


 




Share-based
  payment expense


 


—


 


13,175


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


13,175


 




Conversion
  of subordinated debentures


 


214


 


5,686


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


5,686


 




Balances
  at September 30, 2007


 


139,240


 


1,232,845


 


(199,961


)


15,722


 


410,198


 


1,458,804


 




Net
  income


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


114,524


 


114,524


 




Foreign
  currency translation adjustments


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(7,714


)


—


 


(7,714


)




Reclassification
  adjustments for amounts included in income, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


2,302


 


—


 


2,302


 




Change
  in unrealized loss on cash flow hedge instruments, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(9,888


)


—


 


(9,888


)




Comprehensive
  income


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


99,224


 




Dividends
  ($0.60 per common share)


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(84,012


)


(84,012


)




Issuance
  of common stock pursuant to team member stock plans


 


1,040


 


17,206


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


17,206


 




Retirement
  of treasury stock


 


—


 


—


 


199,961


 


—


 


(199,961


)


—


 




Excess
  tax benefit related to exercise of team member stock options


 


—


 


6,083


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


6,083


 




Share-based
  payment expense


 


—


 


10,505


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


10,505


 




Cumulative
  effect of new accounting standard adoption


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(1,288


)


(1,288


)




Other


 


6


 


(498


)


—


 


—


 


—


 


(498


)




Balances
  at September 28, 2008


 


140,286


 


1,266,141


 


—


 


422


 


239,461


 


1,506,024


 




Net
  income


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


146,804


 


146,804


 




Foreign
  currency translation adjustments


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(8,748


)


—


 


(8,748


)




Reclassification
  adjustments for amounts included in income, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


8,440


 


—


 


8,440


 




Change
  in unrealized loss on cash flow hedge instruments, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(13,481


)


—


 


(13,481


)




Comprehensive
  income


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


133,015


 




Redeemable
  preferred stock dividends


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(28,050


)


(28,050


)




Issuance
  of common stock pursuant to team member stock plans


 


256


 


4,286


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


4,286


 




Excess
  tax benefit related to exercise of team member stock options


 


—


 


54


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


54


 




Share-based
  payment expense


 


—


 


12,795


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


12,795


 




Other


 


—


 


(248


)


—


 


—


 


—


 


(248


)




Balances at September 27, 2009


 


140,542


 


$


1,283,028


 


$


—


 


$


(13,367


)


$


358,215


 


$


1,627,876


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of
these consolidated financial statements.
 
42





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Statements
of Cash Flows
(In
thousands)
Fiscal
years ended September 27, 2009, September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Cash flows from operating activities


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Net
  income


 


$


146,804


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 




Adjustments
  to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Depreciation
  and amortization


 


266,695


 


249,213


 


186,390


 




Loss
  on disposition of fixed assets


 


3,012


 


3,754


 


4,038


 




Impairment
  of long-lived assets


 


24,508


 


9,195


 


1,616


 




Share-based
  payment expense


 


12,795


 


10,505


 


13,175


 




LIFO
  expense (benefit)


 


(5,598


)


12,683


 


6,858


 




Deferred
  income tax expense (benefit)


 


14,076


 


(9,993


)


(27,203


)




Excess
  tax benefit related to exercise of team member stock options


 


(42


)


(5,686


)


(12,839


)




Deferred
  lease liabilities


 


48,029


 


44,167


 


27,393


 




Other


 


2,800


 


(65


)


(217


)




Net
  change in current assets and liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Accounts
  receivable


 


10,408


 


(10,468


)


(5,061


)




Merchandise
  inventories


 


21,732


 


(52,630


)


(50,486


)




Prepaid
  expenses and other current assets


 


21,415


 


(27,833


)


(4,603


)




Accounts
  payable


 


6,527


 


(45,378


)


41,598


 




Accrued
  payroll, bonus and other benefits due team members


 


11,985


 


14,413


 


1,747


 




Other
  current liabilities


 


14,696


 


14,350


 


17,825


 




Net
  change in other long-term liabilities


 


(12,121


)


14,241


 


8,515


 




Net
  cash provided by operating activities


 


587,721


 


334,992


 


391,486


 




Cash flows from investing activities


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Development
  costs of new locations


 


(247,999


)


(357,520


)


(388,759


)




Other
  property and equipment expenditures


 


(66,616


)


(171,952


)


(135,772


)




Acquisition
  of intangible assets


 


(1,604


)


(1,630


)


(25,002


)




Purchase
  of available-for-sale securities


 


—


 


(194,316


)


(277,283


)




Sale
  of available-for-sale securities


 


—


 


194,316


 


475,625


 




Decrease
  (increase) in restricted cash


 


(70,406


)


1,693


 


57,755


 




Payment
  for purchase of acquired entities, net of cash acquired


 


—


 


(5,480


)


(596,236


)




Proceeds
  received from divestiture, net


 


—


 


163,913


 


—


 




Other
  investing activities


 


342


 


(1,745


)


(701


)




Net
  cash used in investing activities


 


(386,283


)


(372,721


)


(890,373


)




Cash flows from financing activities


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Common
  stock dividends paid


 


—


 


(109,072


)


(96,742


)




Preferred
  stock dividends paid


 


(19,833


)


—


 


—


 




Issuance
  of common stock


 


4,286


 


18,019


 


54,383


 




Purchase
  of treasury stock


 


—


 


—


 


(99,997


)




Excess
  tax benefit related to exercise of team member stock options


 


42


 


5,686


 


12,839


 




Proceeds
  from issuance of redeemable preferred stock, net


 


413,052


 


—


 


—


 




Proceeds
  from long-term borrowings


 


123,000


 


317,000


 


717,000


 




Payments
  on long-term debt and capital lease obligations


 


(318,370


)


(161,151


)


(93,360


)




Other
  financing activities


 


(2,722


)


(652


)


—


 




Net
  cash provided by financing activities


 


199,455


 


69,830


 


494,123


 




Effect
  of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents


 


(1,297


)


(1,567


)


2,512


 




Net
  change in cash and cash equivalents


 


399,596


 


30,534


 


(2,252


)




Cash
  and cash equivalents at beginning of year


 


30,534


 


—


 


2,252


 




Cash
  and cash equivalents at end of year


 


$


430,130


 


$


30,534


 


$


—


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Interest
  paid


 


$


43,685


 


$


36,155


 


$


4,561


 




Federal and state income taxes paid


 


$


69,701


 


$


118,366


 


$


152,626


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
 
43





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements
Fiscal
years ended September 27, 2009, September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007
 
(1) Description
of Business
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries
(collectively “Whole Foods Market,” “Company,” or “We”) own and operate the
largest chain of natural and organic food supermarkets. Our Company mission is
to promote vitality and well-being for all individuals by supplying the highest
quality, most wholesome foods available. Through our growth, we have had a
large and positive impact on the natural and organic foods movement throughout
the United States, helping lead the industry to nationwide acceptance over the
last 29 years. We opened our first store in Texas in 1980 and, as of September 27,
2009 we have expanded our operations both by opening new stores and acquiring
existing stores from third parties to 284 stores: 273 stores in 38 U.S. states
and the District of Columbia; six stores in Canada; and five stores in the
United Kingdom.
 
(2) Summary
of Significant Accounting Policies
 
Definition
of Fiscal Year
 
We
report our results of operations on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the
last Sunday in September. Fiscal years 2009 and 2008 were 52-week years and
fiscal year 2007 was a 53-week year.
 
Principles
of Consolidation
 
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared
in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. All
significant majority-owned subsidiaries are consolidated on a line-by-line
basis, and all significant intercompany accounts and transactions are
eliminated upon consolidation.
 
Adoption
of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification
 
In June 2009, the
Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards
Codification (“ASC”) Update No. 2009-01 (“ASU No. 2009-01”), “Topic
105 — Generally Accepted Accounting Principles,” which amends the ASC for the
issuance of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 168 (“SFAS No. 168”),
“The FASB Accounting Standards Codification and the Hierarchy of Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles.” ASU No. 2009-01 includes SFAS No. 168
in its entirety and establishes the ASC as the source of authoritative
accounting principles recognized by FASB for all nongovernmental entities in
the preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP. For SEC
registrants, rules and interpretive releases of the SEC under federal
securities laws are also considered authoritative sources of GAAP. The guidance
is effective for financial statements issued for interim and annual periods
ending after September 15, 2009. We adopted the FASB ASC for fiscal year
ended September 27, 2009. The adoption had no impact on our financial
statements. All references to authoritative guidance have been updated to cite
relevant ASC Topics, as applicable.
 
Cash
and Cash Equivalents
 
We
consider all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of 90 days or
less to be cash equivalents.
 
Restricted Cash
 
Restricted
cash primarily relates to cash held as collateral to support a portion of our
projected workers’ compensation obligations.
 
Inventories
 
We value our inventories
at the lower of cost or market. Cost was determined using the last-in,
first-out (“LIFO”) method for approximately 93.6% and 94.0% of inventories in
fiscal years 2009 and 2008, respectively. Under the LIFO method, the cost
assigned to items sold is based on the cost of the most recent items purchased.
As a result, the costs of the first items purchased remain in inventory and are
used to value ending inventory. The excess of estimated current costs over LIFO
carrying value, or LIFO reserve, was approximately $27.1 million and $32.7
million at September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008, respectively.
Costs for remaining inventories are determined by the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”)
method.
 
Cost was determined using
the retail method and the item cost method for inventories in fiscal years 2009
and 2008. Under the retail method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the
resulting gross margins are determined by counting each item in inventory, then
applying a cost-to-retail ratio for various groupings of similar items to the
retail value of inventories. Inherent in the retail inventory method
calculations are certain management judgments and estimates which could impact
the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as the resulting gross margins.
The item cost method involves counting each item in inventory, assigning costs
to each of these items based on the actual purchase costs (net of vendor
allowances) of each item and recording the actual cost of items sold. The item
cost method of accounting enables management to more precisely manage inventory
and purchasing levels when compared to the retail method of accounting.
 
44





Table of
Contents
 
Our largest
supplier, United Natural Foods, Inc., accounted for approximately 28%,
32%, and 24% of our total purchases in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively.
 
Property
and Equipment
 
Property
and equipment is stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and
amortization. We provide depreciation of equipment over the estimated useful
lives (generally three to 15 years) using the straight-line method. We provide
amortization of leasehold improvements and real estate assets under capital
lease on the straight-line method over the shorter of the estimated useful
lives of the improvements or the terms of the related leases. Terms of leases
used in the determination of estimated useful lives may include renewal periods
at the Company’s option if exercise of the option is determined to be
reasonably assured at the inception of the lease. We provide depreciation of
buildings over the estimated useful lives (generally 20 to 30 years) using the
straight-line method. Costs related to a projected site determined to be
unsatisfactory and general site selection costs that cannot be identified with
a specific store location are charged to operations currently. The Company
recognizes a liability for the fair value of a conditional asset retirement
obligation when the obligation is incurred. Repair and maintenance costs are
expensed as incurred. Interest costs on significant projects constructed or
developed for the Company’s own use are capitalized as a separate component of
the asset. Upon retirement or disposal of assets, the cost and related
accumulated depreciation are removed from the balance sheet and any gain or
loss is reflected in earnings.
 
Operating Leases
 
The Company leases stores,
non-retail facilities and administrative offices under operating leases. Store
lease agreements generally include rent holidays, rent escalation clauses and
contingent rent provisions for percentage of sales in excess of specified
levels. Most of our lease agreements include renewal periods at the Company’s
option. We recognize rent holiday periods and scheduled rent increases on a
straight-line basis over the lease term beginning with the date the Company
takes possession of the leased space for construction and other purposes. We
record tenant improvement allowances and rent holidays as deferred rent
liabilities and amortize the deferred rent over the terms of the lease to rent.
We record rent liabilities for contingent percentage of sales lease provisions
when we determine that it is probable that the specified levels will be reached
as defined by the lease.
 
Goodwill
 
Goodwill
consists of the excess of cost of acquired enterprises over the sum of the
amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired less liabilities assumed.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually at the beginning of the Company’s
fourth fiscal quarter, or more frequently if impairment indicators arise, on a
reporting unit level. We allocate goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill
impairment testing. We compare our fair value, which is determined utilizing
both a market value method and discounted projected future cash flows, to our
carrying value for the purpose of identifying impairment. Our annual impairment
review requires extensive use of accounting judgment and financial estimates.
 
Intangible
Assets
 
Intangible
assets include acquired leasehold rights, favorable lease assets, trade names,
brand names, liquor licenses, license agreements, non-competition agreements
and debt issuance costs. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for
impairment quarterly, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
the carrying amount of an intangible asset may not be recoverable. We amortize
definite-lived intangible assets on a straight-line basis over the life of the
related agreement. Currently the weighted average life of contract-based
intangible assets and for marketing-related and other identifiable intangible
assets is approximately 16 years and 2 years, respectively.
 
Impairment
of Long-Lived Assets and Long-Lived Assets to be Disposed of
 
We evaluate
long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances,
such as unplanned negative cash flow or short lease life, indicate that the
carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to
be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset
to future undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If
such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is
measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the
fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of
the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. When the Company impairs
assets related to an operating location, a charge to write down the related
assets is included in the “Direct store expenses” line item on the Consolidated
Statements of Operations. When the Company commits to relocate, close, or
dispose of a location, a charge to write down the related assets to their
estimated recoverable value is included in the “Relocation, store closure and
lease termination costs” line item on the Consolidated Statements of
Operations.
 
45





Table
of Contents
 
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
 
The Company records its financial assets and liabilities at fair value,
in accordance with the framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted
accounting principles. This framework establishes a fair value hierarchy that
prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value:
 
·                  Level 1: Observable inputs that reflect unadjusted quoted prices for
identical assets or liabilities traded in active markets.
·                  Level 2: Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that
are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly.
·                  Level 3: Inputs that are generally unobservable. These inputs may be
used with internally developed methodologies that result in management’s best
estimate of fair value.
 
The provisions of ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,”
are effective for the Company’s nonfinancial assets and liabilities beginning
in the first quarter of fiscal year ended September 26, 2010.
 
The Company holds money
market fund investments that are classified as either cash equivalents or
restricted cash that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis, based on
quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. We had cash equivalent
instruments and restricted cash investments totaling approximately $439.0
million and $70.4 million, respectively, at September 27, 2009.  The carrying amount of the Company’s interest
rate swap agreement is measured at fair value on a recurring basis using a
standard valuation model that incorporates inputs other than quoted prices that
are observable. Declines in fair value below the Company’s carrying value
deemed to be other than temporary are charged against net earnings. Details on
the fair value of the Company’s interest rate swap agreement are included in
Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements, “Derivatives.”
 
The carrying amounts of
trade and other accounts receivable, trade accounts payable, accrued payroll,
bonuses and team member benefits, and other accrued expenses approximate fair
value because of the short maturity of those instruments. Store closure
reserves and estimated workers’ compensation claims are recorded at net present
value to approximate fair value. The carrying amount of our five-year term loan
and revolving line of credit approximates fair value because each has a
variable interest rate which reflects market changes to interest rates and
contains variable risk premiums based on the Company’s corporate ratings.
 
Derivative
Instruments
 
The Company
utilizes derivative financial instruments to hedge its exposure to changes in
interest rates. All derivative financial instruments are recorded on the
balance sheet at their respective fair value. The Company does not use
financial instruments or derivatives for any trading or other speculative
purposes. Hedge effectiveness is measured by comparing the change in fair value
of the hedged item with the change in fair value of the derivative instrument.
The effective portion of the gain or loss of the hedge is recorded on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets under the caption “Accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss).” Any ineffective portion of the hedge, as well as amounts not
included in the assessment of effectiveness, is recorded on the Consolidated
Statements of Operations under the caption “Interest expense.”
 
Effective January 19,
2009 the Company adopted amendments to FASB guidance on ASC 815, “Derivatives
and Hedging,” that establishes, among other things, the disclosure requirements
for derivative instruments and hedging activities. The guidance requires
qualitative disclosures about objectives and strategies for using derivatives,
quantitative disclosures about fair value amounts of gains and losses on
derivative instruments, and disclosures about credit-risk-related contingent
features in derivative agreements.
 
Insurance
and Self-Insurance Reserves
 
The
Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for
the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability,
property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle
liability and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the
risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering
historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other
actuarial assumptions. The Company had insurance payables totaling
approximately $86.9 million and $86.7 million at September 27, 2009 and September 28,
2008, respectively, included in the “Other current liabilities” line item on
the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 
Reserves for Closed Properties
 
The Company maintains reserves for retail stores and
other properties that are no longer being utilized in current operations. The
Company provides for closed property operating lease liabilities using a
present value of the remaining noncancelable lease payments and lease
termination fees after the closing date, net of estimated subtenant income. The
closed property lease liabilities are expected to be paid over the remaining
lease terms, which generally range from one to 16 years. The Company estimates
subtenant income and future cash flows based on the Company’s experience and
knowledge of the area in which the closed property is located, the Company’s
previous efforts to dispose of similar assets and existing economic conditions.
 
46





Table of
Contents
 
The reserves for
closed properties include management’s estimates for lease subsidies, lease
terminations and future payments on exited real estate. Adjustments to closed
property reserves primarily relate to changes in existing economic conditions,
subtenant income or actual exit costs differing from original estimates.
Adjustments are made for changes in estimates in the period in which the
changes become known.
 
Capital lease
properties that are closed are reduced to their estimated fair value. Reduction
in the carrying values of property, equipment and leasehold improvements are
recognized when expected net future cash flows are less than the assets’
carrying value. The Company estimates net future cash flows based on its
experience and knowledge of the area in which the closed property is located
and, when necessary, utilizes local real estate brokers.
 
Revenue
Recognition
 
We recognize revenue for
sales of our products at the point of sale. Discounts provided to customers at
the point of sale are recognized as a reduction in sales as the products are
sold. Sales taxes are not included in revenue.
 
Cost of Goods Sold and Occupancy Costs
 
Cost of goods sold includes cost of
inventory sold during the period, net of discounts and allowances, distribution
and food preparation costs, and shipping and handling costs. The Company
receives various rebates from third party vendors in the form of quantity
discounts and payments under cooperative advertising agreements. Quantity
discounts and cooperative advertising discounts in excess of identifiable
advertising costs are recognized as a reduction of cost of goods sold when the
related merchandise is sold. Occupancy costs include store rental costs,
property taxes, utility costs, repair and maintenance, and property insurance.
 
Vendor Rebates and Allowances
 
The
Company receives various rebates from third party vendors in the form of
purchase or sales volume discounts and payments under cooperative advertising
agreements. Purchase volume discounts are calculated based on actual purchase
volumes. Volume discounts and cooperative advertising discounts in excess of
identifiable advertising costs are recognized as a reduction of cost of goods
sold when the related merchandise is sold.
 
Direct Store Expenses
 
Direct store expenses
consist of store-level expenses such as salaries and benefits costs, supplies,
depreciation, community marketing and other store-specific costs.
 
Advertising
 
Advertising and marketing expense for
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 was approximately $32.9 million, $39.7
million, and $33.0 million, respectively. Advertising costs are charged to
expense as incurred and are included in the “Direct store expenses” line item
on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
 
General and Administrative
Expenses
 
General and
administrative expenses consist of salaries and benefits costs, occupancy and
other related costs associated with corporate and regional administrative
support services.
 
Pre-opening Expenses
 
Pre-opening expenses include rent expense incurred during construction
of new stores and costs related to new store openings, including costs
associated with hiring and training personnel, smallwares, supplies and other
miscellaneous costs. Rent expense is generally incurred approximately thirteen
months prior to a store’s opening date. Other pre-opening expenses are incurred
primarily in the 30 days prior to a new store opening. Pre-opening costs are
expensed as incurred.
 
Relocation, Store Closure and Lease Termination
Costs
 
Relocation
costs consist of moving costs, estimated remaining net lease payments,
accelerated depreciation costs, related asset impairment, and other costs
associated with replaced facilities. Store closure costs consist of estimated
remaining lease payments, accelerated depreciation costs, related asset
impairment, and other costs associated with closed facilities. Lease
termination costs consist of estimated remaining net lease payments for
terminated leases and idle properties, and associated asset impairments.
 
Share-Based
Payments
 
The Company maintains
several share-based incentive plans. We grant options to purchase common stock
under our Whole Foods Market 2009 Stock Incentive Plan, which was approved at
our annual shareholders’ meeting on March 16, 2009 and replaces the Whole
Foods Market 2007 Stock Incentive Plan. All options outstanding are governed by
the original terms and conditions of the grants. Options are granted at an
option price equal to the market value of the stock at the grant date and are 
 
47





Table of Contents
 
generally exercisable
ratably over a four-year period beginning one year from grant date and have a
five or seven year term. The grant date is established once the Company’s Board
of Directors approves the grant and all key terms have been determined. The exercise
prices of our stock option grants are the closing price on the grant date.
Stock option grant terms and conditions are communicated to team members within
a relatively short period of time. Our Company generally approves one primary
stock option grant annually, occurring during a trading window.
 
Our
Company offers a team member stock purchase plan to all full-time team members
with a minimum of 400 hours of service. Participating team members may purchase
our common stock through payroll deductions. At our 2007 annual meeting,
shareholders approved a new Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (“TMSPP”) which
became effective on April 1, 2007. The TMSPP replaces all previous stock
purchase plans and provides for a 5% discount on the shares purchase date market
value which meets the share-based payment, “Safe Harbor” provisions, and
therefore is non-compensatory. As a result, no future compensation expense will
be recognized for our employee stock purchase plan. Under the previous plans,
participating team members could elect to purchase unrestricted shares at 100%
of market value or restricted shares at 85% of market value on the purchase
date.
 
The Company uses the
Black-Scholes multiple option pricing model which requires extensive use of
accounting judgment and financial estimates, including estimates of the
expected term team members will retain their vested stock options before
exercising them, the estimated volatility of the Company’s common stock price
over the expected term, and the number of options that will be forfeited prior
to the completion of their vesting requirements. The related share-based
payment expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period.
The tax savings resulting from tax deductions in excess of expense reflected in
the Company’s financial statements are reflected as a financing cash flow.
Application of alternative assumptions could produce significantly different
estimates of the fair value of share-based payment expense and consequently,
the related amounts recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
 
Income Taxes
 
We
recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities by applying statutory tax
rates in effect at the balance sheet date to differences between the book basis
and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and
liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable
income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to
reverse. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted to reflect changes in
tax laws or rates in the period that includes the enactment date. Significant
accounting judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes
and related accruals, deferred tax assets and liabilities. The Company believes
that its tax positions are consistent with applicable tax, but certain
positions may be challenged by taxing authorities. In the ordinary course of
business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax
outcome is uncertain. In addition, we are subject to periodic audits and
examinations by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other state and local
taxing authorities. Although we believe that our estimates are reasonable,
actual results could differ from these estimates.
 
In
fiscal year 2008, the Company adopted amendments to ASC 740, “Income Taxes,”
which clarify the accounting for uncertainty in tax positions recognized in the
financial statements. Under these provisions, the Company may recognize the tax
benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that
the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities
based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in
the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the
largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon
ultimate settlement. The related amendments also provide guidance on
measurement, classification, interest and penalties associated with tax
positions, and income tax disclosures. See Note 11 to the consolidated
financial statements, “Income Taxes,” for further discussion.
 
Treasury
Stock
 
The Company
maintains a stock repurchase program which expired subsequent to year end on November 8,
2009. Under this program, the Company may repurchase shares of the Company’s
common stock on the open market that are held in treasury at cost. The
subsequent retirement of treasury stock is recorded as a reduction in retained
earnings at cost. The Company’s common stock has no par value.
 
Earnings
per Share
 
Basic earnings per
share is calculated by dividing net income available to common shareholders by
the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the fiscal
period. Net income available to common shareholders in fiscal year 2009 is
calculated using the two-class method, which is an earnings allocation method
for computing earnings per share when an entity’s capital structure includes
common stock and participating securities. The two-class method determines
earnings per share based on dividends declared on common stock and
participating securities (i.e., distributed earnings) and participation rights
of participating securities in any undistributed earnings. The application of
the two-class method is required since the Company’s redeemable preferred
shares contain a participation feature. See further discussion in Note 12 to
the consolidated financial statements, “Redeemable Preferred Stock.”
 
48





Table of
Contents
 
Diluted
earnings per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding plus, where applicable, the additional common shares that would have
been outstanding as a result of the conversion of convertible debt, dilutive
options, and redeemable preferred stock.
 
Comprehensive
Income
 
Comprehensive
income consists of net income; unrealized gains and losses on marketable
securities; unrealized gains and losses on cash flow hedge instruments,
including reclassification adjustments of unrealized losses to net income
related to ongoing interest payments; and foreign currency translation
adjustments, net of income taxes. Comprehensive income is reflected in the
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and Comprehensive Income. At September 27,
2009, accumulated other comprehensive income consisted of foreign currency
translation adjustment losses of approximately $0.7 million and unrealized losses
on cash flow hedge instruments of approximately $12.6 million. At September 28,
2008, accumulated other comprehensive income consisted of foreign currency
translation adjustment gains of approximately $8.0 million and unrealized
losses on cash flow hedge instruments of approximately $7.6 million.
 
Foreign Currency Translation
 
The
Company’s Canadian and United Kingdom operations use their local currency as
their functional currency. Beginning in fiscal year 2009, foreign currency
transaction gains and losses related to Canadian intercompany operations are
charged to net income in the period incurred. The Company recognized foreign
currency expense totaling approximately $0.9 million in fiscal year 2009.
Intercompany transaction gains and losses associated with our United Kingdom
operations are excluded from the determination of net income since these
transactions are considered long-term investments in nature. Assets and
liabilities are translated at exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet
date. Income and expense accounts are translated at the average monthly
exchange rates during the year. Resulting translation adjustments are recorded
as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive income.
 
Segment
Information
 
The Company has
one operating segment and a single reportable segment, natural and organic
foods supermarkets. We currently have six stores in Canada and five stores in
the United Kingdom. All of our remaining operations are domestic. The following
is a summary of annual percentage sales and net long-lived assets by geographic
area:
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Sales:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




United
  States


 


97.2


%


96.5


%


97.3


%




Canada
  and United Kingdom


 


2.8


%


3.5


%


2.7


%




Total
  sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%




Long-lived
  assets, net:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




United
  States


 


96.5


%


96.4


%


95.1


%




Canada
  and United Kingdom


 


3.5


%


3.6


%


4.9


%




Total long-lived assets, net


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
The following is a summary of annual
percentage sales by product category:
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Grocery


 


33.8


%


33.2


%


32.0


%




Prepared
  foods


 


19.1


%


19.3


%


19.8


%




Other
  perishables


 


47.1


%


47.5


%


48.3


%




Total sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
Figures
may not sum due to rounding.
 
Use
of Estimates
 
The
preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions
that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of
contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and
revenues and expenses during the period reported. Actual amounts could differ
from those estimates.
 
Reclassifications
 
Where appropriate, we
have reclassified prior years’ financial statements to conform to current year
presentation. Specifically we have reclassified the effect of the determination
to retire treasury shares in fiscal year 2008 totaling approximately $200.0
million previously classified in “Common stock” to “Retained earnings” on the
consolidated balance sheet as of September 28, 2008. The Company has
determined that all or a portion of the excess of purchase price over par or
stated value 
 
49





Table of Contents
 
associated with the
retirement of treasury shares is required to be charged to retained earnings in
accordance with ASC 505-30, “Equity-Treasury Stock,” and has elected to charge
the entire excess to retained earnings. The Company’s common stock has no par
value. The Company has made a corresponding adjustment to its consolidated
statements of shareholders’ equity and comprehensive income to reflect the
reclassification. There was no impact on previously reported statements of
operations, earning per share amounts, statements of cash flows or total
shareholders’ equity as a result of this reclassification. Additionally, this
reclassification does not impact compliance with any applicable debt covenants
in the Company’s credit agreements.
 
Recent
Accounting Pronouncements
 
In December 2007, the
FASB issued new guidance within ASC 805, “Business Combinations,” which
replaces previous guidance in this Topic and applies to all transactions or
other events in which an entity obtains control of one or more businesses,
including those sometimes referred to as “true mergers” or “mergers of equals”
and combinations achieved without the transfer of consideration. The new
provisions establish principles and requirements for how the acquirer
recognizes and measures identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed, any
noncontrolling interest and goodwill acquired, and also provide for disclosures
to enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and
financial effects of the business combination. Additional amendments address
the recognition and initial measurement, subsequent measurement, and disclosure
of assets and liabilities arising from contingencies acquired as part of a
business combination. The newly issued guidance is effective for fiscal years
beginning after December 15, 2008 and is applied prospectively to business
combinations completed on or after that date. The provisions are effective for
the Company’s fiscal year ending September 26, 2010. We will evaluate the
impact, if any, that the adoption of these provisions could have on our
consolidated financial statements.
 
In December 2007,
the FASB issued amendments to ASC 810, “Consolidation.” These provisions
establish accounting and reporting standards for noncontrolling interests (“minority
interests”) in subsidiaries, and clarify that a noncontrolling interest in a
subsidiary should be accounted for as a component of equity separate from the
parent’s equity. Additionally, these amendments serve to improve the
consistency of guidance in ASC Topics 810 and 805. The amended guidance is
effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years,
beginning after December 15, 2008 and is applied prospectively, except for
presentation and disclosure requirements, which will apply retrospectively.
These provisions are effective for the Company’s first quarter of fiscal year
ending September 26, 2010. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any,
that the adoption of these provisions will have on our consolidated financial
statements.
 
In April 2008, the
FASB issued amendments to ASC 350, “Intangibles — Goodwill and Other.” These
provisions amend the factors that should be considered in developing renewal or
extension assumptions used to determine the useful life of a recognized
intangible asset. The intent of the position is to improve the consistency
between the determination of the useful life of a recognized intangible asset
and the period of expected cash flows used to measure the fair value of the
asset. The amended guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15,
2008. These provisions are effective for the Company’s fiscal year ending September 26,
2010. We will evaluate the impact, if any, that the adoption of these
provisions could have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In May 2008, the FASB issued amendments to ASC
470, “Debt,” which clarify that convertible debt instruments that may be
settled in cash upon conversion (including partial cash settlement) were not
addressed by previously existing guidance and specifies that such users should
separately account for the liability and equity components in a manner that
will reflect the entity’s nonconvertible debt borrowing rate when interest cost
is recognized in subsequent periods. The amended guidance is effective for
fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008, and interim periods within
those fiscal years. These provisions are effective for the Company’s first
quarter of fiscal year ending September 26, 2010. We are currently
evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of these provisions will have
on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In August 2009, the FASB issued ASU No. 2009-04,
“Accounting for Redeemable Equity Instruments — Amendment to Section 480-10-S99.”
The amended guidance represents technical changes to ASC 480, “Distinguishing
Liabilities from Equity,” to reflect SEC staff pronouncements on EITF Topic
D-98, “Classification and Measurement of Redeemable Securities.” The guidance
provided in ASU No. 2009-04 is effective for the first reporting period,
including interim periods, beginning after issuance. ASU No. 2009-04 is
effective for the Company’s first quarter of fiscal year ending September 26,
2010. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of ASU No. 2009-04
will have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In August 2009, the FASB issued ASU No. 2009-05,
“Measuring Liabilities at Fair Value,” which amends ASC 820, “Fair Value
Measurements and Disclosures.” ASU No. 2009-05 provides clarification for
the valuation techniques available when valuing a liability when a quoted price
for an identical liability is not available, and clarifies that no adjustment
is necessary related to the existence of restrictions that prevent the transfer
of the liability. The amendments in this update require the use of valuation
techniques that use the quoted price of an identical liability when traded as
an asset, or quoted prices for similar 
 
50





Table of Contents
 
liabilities or similar liabilities when traded as
assets. The guidance provided in ASU No. 2009-05 is effective for the
first reporting period, including interim periods, beginning after issuance on August 26,
2009. ASU No. 2009-05 is effective for the Company’s first quarter of
fiscal year ending September 26, 2010. We are currently evaluating the
impact, if any, that the adoption of ASU No. 2009-05 will have on our
consolidated financial statements.
 
In September 2009, the FASB issued ASU No. 2009-08,
“Earnings per Share — Amendments to Sections 260-10-S99.” The amended guidance
represents technical changes to ASC 260, “Earnings per Share,” to reflect SEC
staff pronouncements on EITF Topic D-53, “Computation of Earnings Per Share for
a Period that Includes a Redemption or an Induced Conversion of a Portion of a Class of
Preferred Stock,” and EITF Topic D-42, “The Effect of the Calculation of
Earnings per Share for the Redemption or Induced Conversion of Preferred Stock.”
The update consisted principally of formatting changes and removing out-of-date
guidance. The provisions of ASU No. 2009-08 are effective for the first
reporting period, including interim periods, beginning after issuance. ASU No. 2009-08
is effective for the Company’s first quarter of fiscal year ending September 26,
2010. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of ASU No. 2009-08
will have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
(3) Business Combination
 
Effective August 28, 2007, the Company completed the acquisition of Wild
Oats Markets, Inc. (“Wild Oats”) in a cash tender offer of $18.50 per
share, or approximately $565 million plus the assumption of approximately $148
million in existing debt. At the date of acquisition, Wild Oats had 109 stores
in 23 states and British Columbia, Canada operating under four banners: Wild
Oats Marketplace nationwide, Henry’s Farmers Market (“Henry’s”) in Southern
California, Sun Harvest in Texas and Capers Community Market in British
Columbia. To fund the transaction, we entered into a five-year $700 million
senior term loan agreement. We also signed a new five-year $250 million
revolving credit agreement that was increased to $350 million during the third
quarter of fiscal year 2008, which replaced our existing $200 million revolver.
Wild Oats results of operations are included in our consolidated financial
statements for the period beginning August 28, 2007 through September 27,
2009. In connection with the acquisition of Wild Oats, the Company separately
entered into an agreement to sell certain assets and liabilities, consisting
primarily of fixed assets, inventories and operating leases, related to all 35
Henry’s and Sun Harvest stores and a related distribution center in Riverside,
CA to a wholly owned subsidiary of Smart & Final, Inc., a Los
Angeles-based food retailer for approximately $165 million. This sale was
completed effective September 30, 2007. During fiscal year 2008, the
Company finalized the sale price, which effectively reduced total proceeds by
approximately $1.1 million. Regarding the other 74 Wild Oats and Capers banner
stores the Company acquired in the Wild Oats Markets transaction, the Company
has closed 21 stores, and currently intends to close one additional store and
relocate an additional store as an existing Whole Foods Market site in
development opens in fiscal year 2011.
 
The Company believes the synergies gained
from this business combination will create long term value for our customers,
vendors and shareholders as well as exciting opportunities for our new and
existing team members by making us better positioned to compete in this rapidly
changing food retailing environment. The acquisition provided us with immediate
entry into five new states: Arkansas, Indiana, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Utah,
and 14 new areas: Bend, OR; Cincinnati, OH; Indianapolis, IN; Lexington, KY;
Little Rock, AR; Memphis, TN; Naples, FL; Nashville, TN; Reno, NV; Salt Lake
City, UT; Tampa, FL; Tucson, AZ; Tulsa, OK; and Westport, CT.
 
Direct Costs of the Acquisition
 
Direct costs of the acquisition include investment
banking fees, legal and accounting fees and other external costs directly
related to the acquisition.
 
Purchase Price Allocation
 
The purchase price of the acquired operations was
comprised of (in thousands):
 



Cash
  payment to Wild Oats shareholders


 


$


564,726


 




Direct
  costs of the acquisition


 


36,992


 




Total purchase price


 


$


601,718


 



 
The acquisition was accounted for under the purchase
method of accounting with Whole Foods Market treated as the acquiring entity.
Accordingly, the consideration paid by Whole Foods Market to complete the
acquisition has been allocated to the assets and liabilities acquired based
upon their estimated fair values as of the date of the acquisition. The excess
of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of assets acquired and
liabilities assumed was recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is non-amortizing for
financial statement purposes and is not tax deductible.
 
51





Table of Contents
 
The following summarizes the fair values of the assets
acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, including purchase
price adjustments since the purchase price allocation as previously disclosed
as of September 28, 2008 (in thousands):
 



 


 


Purchase Price


 


Purchase


 


Purchase Price


 




 


 


Allocation


 


Price


 


Allocation


 




 


 


September 28, 2008


 


Adjustments


 


September 27, 2009


 




Current
  assets


 


$


52,039


 


$


—


 


$


52,039


 




Property
  and equipment


 


64,471


 


—


 


64,471


 




Goodwill


 


546,066


 


(1,305


)


544,761


 




Intangible
  assets


 


33,353


 


—


 


33,353


 




Deferred
  income taxes


 


71,886


 


437


 


72,323


 




Other
  assets


 


339


 


—


 


339


 




Assets
  held for sale


 


171,115


 


—


 


171,115


 




Total
  assets acquired


 


939,269


 


(868


)


938,401


 




Current
  liabilities


 


142,999


 


—


 


142,999


 




Long-term
  debt


 


134,126


 


—


 


134,126


 




Other
  liabilities


 


53,224


 


(868


)


52,356


 




Liabilities
  held for sale


 


7,202


 


—


 


7,202


 




Total
  liabilities assumed


 


337,551


 


(868


)


336,683


 




Net assets
  acquired


 


$


601,718


 


$


—


 


$


601,718


 



 
The purchase price
allocation was substantially completed during fiscal year 2008, with the
exception of an additional reserve of approximately $2.4 million related to
income tax uncertainties and the reduction of certain restructuring reserves of
approximately $3.7 million.
 
Estimated fair values of intangible assets acquired
are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


 


 


Weighted
  Average


 




 


 


Estimated


 


Useful
  Lives


 




 


 


Fair Value


 


(Years)


 




Non-amortizing:


 


 


 


 


 




Liquor
  licenses


 


$


1,165


 


 


 




Amortizing:


 


 


 


 


 




Trade
  and brand names


 


6,579


 


1


 




Favorable
  operating leases


 


25,609


 


18


 




Total
  amortizing


 


32,188


 


14


 




Total


 


$


33,353


 


 


 



 
Amortizing intangible assets are amortized on a
straight-line basis over their remaining expected useful lives of approximately
one to 32 years.
 
In connection with the acquisition, the Company
recognized liabilities totaling approximately $8.4 million for estimated costs
associated with plans to involuntarily terminate certain team members of Wild
Oats, contract termination fees and other legal reserves totaling approximately
$11.4 million, and estimated costs to close certain store locations totaling
approximately $61.3 million. As of September 27, 2009, all team member
termination liabilities have been distributed and contract termination fees and
other legal reserves were $6.3 million as a result of adjustments and payments
made since acquisition. Store closure reserves are discussed further in Note 7
to the consolidated financial statements, “Reserves for Closed Properties.”
 
The Company assumed debt totaling approximately $148
million in the acquisition consisting primarily of convertible subordinated
debentures and capital lease obligations. The estimated fair value of the debt
assumed by the Company was approximately $134 million. Excluding capital lease
obligations, all debt assumed as part of the Wild Oats acquisition was fully
repaid during fiscal year 2008.  Debt is
discussed further in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements, “Long-Term
Debt.”
 
The estimated values of operating leases with
unfavorable terms compared with current market conditions totaled approximately
$1.2 million. These leases have an estimated weighted average life of
approximately 14 years and are included in other liabilities.
 
52





Table of Contents
 
Henry’s and Sun Harvest Divestiture
 
In
connection with the acquisition of Wild Oats, the Company separately entered
into an agreement to sell certain assets and liabilities, consisting primarily
of fixed assets, inventories and operating leases, related to all 35 Henry’s
and Sun Harvest stores and a related distribution center in Riverside, CA to a
wholly owned subsidiary of Smart & Final, Inc., a Los
Angeles-based food retailer for approximately $165 million. This sale was
completed effective September 30, 2007. During the first quarter of fiscal
year 2008, the Company received proceeds totaling approximately $165 million.
As part of purchase accounting for the Wild Oats acquisition, the Henry’s and
Sun Harvest net assets were adjusted to fair value and therefore no gain or
loss was recognized related to this divestiture. During fiscal year 2008, the
Company finalized the sale price, which effectively reduced total proceeds by
approximately $1.1 million.
 
Transition Services Agreement
 
In connection with the
sale of the Henry’s and Sun Harvest stores, Whole Foods Market entered into a
transition services agreement (“TSA”) with Smart & Final under which
Whole Foods Market provided certain general and administrative services for the
35 stores for up to two years. The TSA provided for payments to the Company
calculated for each service area as a certain percentage of total monthly sales
of the Henry’s and Sun Harvest locations, initially totaling 1.75% of total
monthly sales for all services provided under the agreement. The revenue
associated with the agreement was approximately equal to the incremental cost
of providing the support. During fiscal year 2008, the Company earned
approximately $3.4 million in TSA fees which are included on the accompanying
Consolidated Statements of Operations under the caption “General and
administrative expenses.” At the end of fiscal year 2008, services related to
the support agreement were substantially complete.
 
Unaudited Pro Forma Financial Information
 
The following pro forma financial information for
fiscal year 2007 presents the combined historical results of the operations of
Whole Foods Market and Wild Oats as if the Wild Oats acquisition and the sale
of the Henry’s and Sun Harvest stores had occurred at the beginning of fiscal
year 2007. Certain adjustments have been made to reflect changes in
depreciation, amortization and income taxes based on the Company’s preliminary
estimates of fair values recognized in the application of purchase accounting,
and interest expense on borrowings to finance the acquisition. These
adjustments are subject to change as the initial estimates are refined over
time.
 
Due to differences in
accounting calendars, the pro forma results of operations for fiscal year ended
2007 combines the 53-weeks ended September 30, 2007 for Whole Foods Market
with the 52-weeks ended September 30, 2007 for Wild Oats. The Wild Oats
pro forma results of operations include approximately 47 weeks of Wild Oats
results and approximately five weeks of actual results beginning August 25,
2007 which are included in Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations. Pro
forma results of operations were as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2007


 




Sales


 


$


7,295,384


 




Net
  income


 


142,788


 




Earnings
  per share:


 


 


 




Basic


 


$


1.02


 




Diluted


 


$


1.01


 




Weighted
  average shares outstanding:


 


 


 




Basic


 


140,088


 




Diluted


 


141,836


 



 
This pro forma financial information is not intended
to represent or be indicative of what would have occurred if the transactions
had taken place on the dates presented and are not indicative of what Whole
Foods Market’s actual results of operations would have been had the acquisition
and sale been completed on the dates indicated above. Further, the pro forma
combined results do not reflect one-time costs to fully merge and operate the
combined organization more efficiently, or anticipated synergies expected to
result from the combination and should not be relied upon as being indicative
of the future results that Whole Foods Market will experience.
 
(4) FTC Settlement Agreement
 
The Federal Trade
Commission (“FTC”) had challenged the Company’s August 28, 2007
acquisition of Wild Oats Markets, Inc. Prior to completion of the Wild
Oats acquisition, the FTC had filed a motion in the United States District
Court for the District of Columbia seeking a preliminary injunction to enjoin
the acquisition. The FTC had also filed a complaint commencing an
administrative proceeding challenging the acquisition.
 
On August 16, 2007,
the United States District Court for the District of Columbia denied the FTC’s
motion for a preliminary injunction. The FTC appealed denial of the preliminary
injunction motion to the United States Court of Appeals for the 
 
53





Table of Contents
 
District of Columbia
Circuit and on July 29, 2008 the Court of Appeals reversed the District
Court and remanded the case to the District Court for further proceedings. On
remand, the FTC renewed its motion for preliminary injunctive relief pending
resolution of the administrative action, specifically seeking a hold separate
order, the rebranding of all former Wild Oats stores, and the appointment of a
trustee or special master to establish an independent management team for the
former Wild Oats assets and oversee Whole Foods Market’s compliance with the
order. The administrative proceeding was scheduled to commence on April 6,
2009. On January 28, 2009, the FTC issued an order granting the Company’s
motion to withdraw the administrative case from adjudication for the purpose of
considering a proposed consent agreement that would resolve the administrative
proceeding. A further order dated February 4, 2009 extended the withdrawal
through March 6, 2009.
 
On March 6, 2009,
the Company reached a settlement agreement with the FTC. Pursuant to FTC
protocol, the settlement agreement was placed on public record for a 30-day
comment period which ended April 6, 2009. The Company received final
approval of the settlement agreement by the FTC Commissioners on June 1,
2009. Under the terms of the agreement, a third-party divestiture trustee was
appointed to market for sale until September 8, 2009:  leases and related assets for 19
non-operating former Wild Oats stores; leases and related fixed assets
(excluding inventory) for 12 operating acquired Wild Oats stores and one
operating Whole Foods Market store; and Wild Oats trademarks and other
intellectual property associated with the Wild Oats stores.
 
Pursuant to the
settlement agreement, the divestiture period has been extended by the FTC until
March 8, 2010 for six operating and two non-operating former Wild Oats
stores as well as Wild Oats trademarks and other intellectual property
associated with the Wild Oats stores for which good faith offers that have been
received but not finalized. The divestiture period for those eight stores may
be extended further only to allow the FTC to approve any previously submitted
purchase agreements. The seven remaining operating stores may be retained by
the Company without further obligation to attempt to divest.
 
Subsequent to the FTC’s
approval of the final consent order, the Company recorded adjustments totaling
approximately $4.8 million to measure long-lived assets and certain lease
liabilities related to certain of the operating stores for which sale and
transfer of the assets was determined to be probable or more likely than not at
the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. The total fair
value associated with these locations at September 27, 2009 was
approximately $0.1 million. The Company has determined that these locations do
not meet the conditions for reporting their results in discontinued operations.
Cash expenses relating to legal and trustee fees are not expected to be
material. No additional material charges are expected related to the potential
sale of the six operating stores, the two non-operating properties for which a
lease liability reserve is already recorded, or the trademarks which have been
fully amortized.
 
During fiscal years 2009
and 2008, the Company incurred approximately $14.7 million and $2.5 million,
respectively, in legal costs related to the FTC lawsuit which are included on
the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations under the caption “General
and administrative expenses.”
 
(5) Property
and Equipment
 
Balances
of major classes of property and equipment are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 




Land


 


$


48,928


 


$


51,436


 




Buildings
  and leasehold improvements


 


1,687,103


 


1,463,907


 




Capitalized
  real estate leases


 


24,874


 


24,874


 




Fixtures
  and equipment


 


1,187,195


 


1,157,086


 




Construction
  in progress and equipment not yet in service


 


130,068


 


197,026


 




 


 


3,078,168


 


2,894,329


 




Less
  accumulated depreciation and amortization


 


(1,180,315


)


(994,212


)




 


 


$


 1,897,853


 


$


1,900,117


 



 
Depreciation and
amortization expense related to property and equipment totaled approximately
$255.3 million, $233.5 million, and $181.9 million for fiscal years 2009, 2008
and 2007, respectively. Property and equipment included accumulated accelerated
depreciation and other asset impairments totaling approximately $9.6 million
and $16.5 million at September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008,
respectively. Property and equipment includes approximately $5.2 million, $6.0
million and $0.9 million of interest capitalized during fiscal years 2009, 2008
and 2007, respectively. Development costs of new locations totaled
approximately $248.0 million, $357.5 million, and $388.8 million in fiscal
years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. As of November 4, 2009, we had
signed leases for 53 stores under development. Construction accruals related to
development sites, remodels, and expansions were included in the “Other current
liabilities” line item on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and totaled
approximately $35.2 million and $55.6 million at September 27, 2009 and September 28,
2008, respectively. Additionally, the Company also held approximately $4.8
million, net of accumulated depreciation, related to 
 
54





Table of Contents
 
certain land and
buildings held for sale as of September 27, 2009 in the “Prepaid expenses
and other current assets” line item on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 
Fixed asset impairment charges were included in the
following line items on the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the
fiscal years ended September 27, 2009, September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007 (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Direct
  store expenses


 


$


14,514


 


$


664


 


$


—


 




Relocation,
  store closure and lease termination costs


 


8,807


 


7,703


 


1,616


 




Total impairment
  of fixed assets


 


$


23,321


 


$


8,367


 


$


1,616


 



 
Total fixed asset
impairment charges during fiscal year 2009 included approximately $4.4 million related
to locations included in the FTC settlement. The FTC settlement is discussed
further in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements, “FTC Settlement
Agreement.”
 
(6) Goodwill and Other
Intangible Assets
 
Goodwill is
reviewed for impairment annually at the beginning of the fourth fiscal quarter,
or more frequently if impairment indicators arise. We allocate goodwill to one
reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. During the first quarter of
fiscal year 2009, events or changes in circumstances occurred that indicated a
reduction in the fair value of our reporting unit below its carrying value,
could have occurred, including declines in our comparable store sales and
market capitalization and downgrades to our corporate credit ratings. Accordingly,
the Company performed an interim evaluation of goodwill for impairment as of January 18,
2009 in addition to our annual evaluation. There were no impairments of
goodwill during fiscal years 2009, 2008 or 2007. During fiscal year 2009 the
Company recorded goodwill adjustments of approximately $1.3 million that relate
primarily to certain restructuring reserves and certain tax liabilities. During
fiscal year 2007, we acquired goodwill totaling approximately $546.0 million in
connection with the acquisition of Wild Oats, including purchase price
adjustments during fiscal year 2008.
 
Indefinite-lived
intangible assets are evaluated for impairment quarterly, or whenever events or
changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
During fiscal year 2009 we impaired $0.4 million consisting of liquor licenses
related to locations included in the FTC settlement. There were no impairments
of indefinite-lived intangible assets during fiscal year 2008 or 2007.
 
Definite-lived
intangible assets are amortized over the useful life of the related agreement.
We acquired definite-lived intangible assets totaling approximately $1.6
million and $1.7 million during fiscal years 2009 and 2008, respectively,
consisting primarily of acquired leasehold rights. The Company recorded
impairment charges totaling approximately $0.8 million during fiscal year 2009
related to certain definite-lived intangible assets. Asset impairment charges
of approximately $0.5 million were related to the FTC settlement and included
in the “Relocation, store closure, and lease termination costs” line item,
while approximately $0.3 million related to certain favorable lease assets was
included in the “Direct store expenses” line item on the Consolidated
Statements of Operations. During fiscal year 2008, impairment charges totaling
approximately $0.8 million related to certain favorable lease assets were
included in the “Direct store expenses” line item on the Consolidated
Statements of Operations. There were no impairment charges to definite-lived
intangible assets in fiscal year 2007. Amortization associated with intangible
assets totaled approximately $7.9 million, $12.9 million, and $2.7 million
during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
 
The components of
intangible assets were as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 




 


 


Gross carrying


 


Accumulated


 


Gross carrying


 


Accumulated


 




 


 


amount


 


amortization


 


amount


 


amortization


 




Indefinite-lived
  contract-based


 


$


1,566


 


$


—


 


$


1,966


 


$


—


 




Definite-lived
  contract-based


 


96,515


 


(25,105


)


95,424


 


(18,995


)




Definite-lived
  marketing-related and other


 


225


 


(166


)


8,319


 


(8,215


)




 


 


$


98,306


 


$


(25,271


)


$


105,709


 


$


(27,210


)



 
Amortization
associated with the net carrying amount of intangible assets is estimated to be
approximately $6.1 million in fiscal year 2010, $6.0 million in fiscal year
2011, $6.0 million in fiscal year 2012, $5.1 million in fiscal year 2013 and
$5.0 million in fiscal year 2014.
 
55





Table of Contents
 
(7) Reserves
for Closed Properties
 
Following is a
summary of store closure reserve activity during the fiscal years ended September 27,
2009 and September 28, 2008 (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 




Beginning
  balance


 


$


69,269


 


$


96,967


 




Additions


 


8,276


 


9,092


 




Usage


 


(17,841


)


(22,045


)




Adjustments


 


9,524


 


(14,745


)




Ending Balance


 


$


69,228


 


$


69,269


 



 
Additions to store
closure reserves relate to the accretion of interest on existing reserves and
new closures. During fiscal year 2009, the Company recorded reserves totaling
approximately $2.7 million, related to five new closures. Adjustments to closed
property reserves primarily relate to changes in existing economic conditions,
subtenant income, actual exit costs differing from original estimates, or
foreign currency translation adjustments. Adjustments are made for changes in
estimates in the period in which the changes become known. During fiscal year
2009, the Company recognized charges of approximately $12.9 million related to
increases in reserves primarily due to changes in certain subtenant income
estimates related to the continued depression in the commercial real estate
market, which are included on the accompanying Consolidated Statements of
Operations under the caption “Relocation, store closure and lease termination
costs.” During fiscal year 2008, the Company’s initial estimates of Wild Oats
Markets store closure reserves were reduced by approximately $28.8 million as
part of the final purchase price allocation. These purchase price adjustments
related primarily to the completion of evaluations of the physical and market
condition of acquired locations as of August 28, 2007, resulting in the
Company’s decision to close seven additional Wild Oats store locations and
adjustments to the fair values of certain assets and store closure reserves.
Additionally, the Company recognized charges of approximately $14.1 million
related to the increases in reserves due to the downturn in the real estate
market and the economy in general, during the fourth quarter of fiscal year
2008.
 
(8) Long-Term Debt
 
We
have long-term debt and obligations under capital leases as follows (in
thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 




Obligations
  under capital lease agreements, due in monthly installments through 2029


 


$


18,649


 


$


19,021


 




Convertible
  debentures, including accreted interest


 


—


 


2,698


 




Revolving
  line of credit


 


—


 


195,000


 




Cash
  flow hedge instrument


 


20,588


 


12,451


 




Term
  loan


 


700,000


 


700,000


 




Total
  long-term debt


 


739,237


 


929,170


 




Less
  current installments


 


389


 


380


 




Long-term debt,
  less current installments


 


$


738,848


 


$


928,790


 



 
During fiscal year
2007, the Company entered into a $700 million, five-year term loan agreement to
finance the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. The loan, which is secured by a
pledge of substantially all of the stock in our subsidiaries, bears interest at
our option of the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin,
currently 0.75%, or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, currently 1.75%, based on
the Company’s Moody’s and S&P rating. These applicable margins are
currently the maximum allowed under these agreements. The interest period on
LIBOR borrowings may range from one to six months at our option. The Company
recorded approximately $3.4 million in debt origination fees for the term loan
which are being amortized on a straight-line basis over the life of the loan.
During the first quarter of fiscal year 2009, as a result of downgrades to our
corporate credit ratings and as called for in the loan agreement, the
participating banks obtained security interests in certain of the Company’s
assets to collateralize amounts outstanding under the term loan. The term loan
agreement contains certain affirmative covenants including maintenance of
certain financial ratios and certain negative covenants including limitations
on additional indebtedness and payments as defined in the agreement. No further
material restrictive covenants or limitations on additional indebtedness and
payments have been imposed as a result of the downgrades to our corporate
credit ratings. At September 27, 2009, we were in compliance with all
applicable debt covenants.
 
The Company also has
outstanding a $350 million revolving line of credit, which is secured by a
pledge of substantially all of the stock in our subsidiaries, that extends to
2012. The credit agreement contains certain affirmative covenants including
maintenance of certain financial ratios and certain negative covenants including
limitations on additional indebtedness and payments as defined in the
agreement. At September 27, 2009, we were in compliance with all
applicable debt covenants. All outstanding amounts borrowed under this
agreement bear interest at our option of the ABR plus an applicable margin,
currently 0.875%, or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, currently 1.875%, based
on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P rating. 
 
56





Table of Contents
 
These applicable margins
are currently the maximum allowed under these agreements. During the first
quarter of fiscal year 2009, as a result of downgrades to our corporate credit
ratings and as called for in the loan agreement, the participating banks
obtained security interests in certain of the Company’s assets to collateralize
amounts outstanding under the revolving credit facility. No further material
restrictive covenants or limitations on additional indebtedness and payments
have been imposed as a result of the downgrades to our corporate credit
ratings. Commitment fees on the undrawn amount, reduced by outstanding letters
of credit, are payable under this agreement. At September 28, 2008 the
Company had $195 million drawn under this agreement. During fiscal year 2009,
the Company repaid all amounts outstanding and no amounts were drawn under this
agreement at September 27, 2009. The amount available to the Company under
the agreement was effectively reduced to $335.2 million and $75.9 million by
outstanding letters of credit totaling approximately $14.8 million and $79.1
million at September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008, respectively.
This decrease in outstanding letters of credit relates to approximately $70.4
million of cash invested as collateral to support a portion of our workers’
compensation obligation that was previously held as a letter of credit.
 
A summary of applicable
interest rates as of the end of fiscal years 2009 and 2008 follows:
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 




Term
  loan agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin on non-swap portion of loan


 


0.253


%


2.469


%




Interest rate
  swap fixed interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


4.718


%


4.718


%




Applicable
  margin – LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.750


%


1.375


%




Applicable
  margin – ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.750


%


0.375


%




Line
  of credit agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


n/a


 


4.221


%




Applicable
  margin – LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.875


%


1.500


%




Applicable
  margin – ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.875


%


0.500


%




Commitment fee
  on undrawn amount


 


0.375


%


0.275


%



 
The Company assumed
convertible debentures totaling approximately $115.0 million in the Wild Oats
acquisition, of which approximately $94.2 million was paid off during fiscal
year 2007 and approximately $21.8 million, which included a related conversion
premium totaling approximately $0.9 million, was paid off during fiscal year
2008. Approximately 250 Whole Foods Market zero coupon convertible subordinated
debentures were converted at the option of the holders to approximately 6,000
shares of Company common stock during fiscal year 2008. We had outstanding
convertible subordinated debentures which had a carrying amount of
approximately $2.7 million at September 28, 2008. In fiscal year 2009, the
Company redeemed all remaining debentures at a redemption price equal to the
issue price plus accrued original issue discount totaling approximately $2.7 million.
 
The Company is
committed under certain capital leases for rental of certain equipment,
buildings and land. These leases expire or become subject to renewal clauses at
various dates through 2029. Capital leases totaling approximately $19.1 million
were assumed with the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets.  Lease agreements are discussed further in
Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements, “Leases.”
 
(9) Derivatives
 
During fiscal year 2008,
the Company entered into a three-year interest rate swap agreement with a
notional amount of $490 million to effectively fix the interest rate on $490
million of the term loan at 4.718%, excluding the applicable margin and
associated fees, to help manage cash flow exposure related to interest rate
fluctuations. The interest rate swap was designated as a cash flow hedge. Hedge
ineffectiveness was not material during fiscal year 2009 or 2008. The interest
rate swap agreement does not contain a credit-risk-related contingent feature.
 
At September 27,
2009, the carrying amount of the Company’s interest rate swap totaled
approximately $20.6 million and is included on the “Long-term debt and capital
lease obligations, less current installments” line item on the Consolidated
Balance Sheets. The Company had accumulated net derivative losses of
approximately $12.6 million and $7.6 million, net of taxes, in accumulated
other comprehensive income as of September 27, 2009 and September 28,
2008, respectively, related to this cash flow hedge. These losses are being
recognized as an adjustment to interest expense over the same period in which
the interest costs on the related debt are recognized. During fiscal years 2009
and 2008, the Company reclassified approximately $14.4 million and $4.1
million, respectively, from accumulated other comprehensive income related to
ongoing interest payments that was included in the “Interest expense” line item
on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The Company expects to reclass
approximately $18.3 million from accumulated other comprehensive income to
interest expense in the next twelve months.
 
57





Table of
Contents
 
(10) Leases
 
The
Company is committed under certain capital leases for rental of equipment,
buildings, and land and certain operating leases for rental of facilities and
equipment. These leases expire or become subject to renewal clauses at various
dates from 2010 to 2054. Amortization of equipment under capital lease is
included with depreciation expense.
 
Rental
expense charged to operations under operating leases for fiscal years 2009,
2008 and 2007 totaled approximately $281.9 million, $257.5 million and $201.0
million, respectively.
 
Minimum
rental commitments and sublease rental income required by all noncancelable
leases are approximately as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


Capital


 


Operating


 


Sublease


 




Fiscal
  year 2010


 


$


2,066


 


$


265,408


 


$


6,481


 




Fiscal
  year 2011


 


2,066


 


287,365


 


5,802


 




Fiscal
  year 2012


 


2,087


 


304,124


 


5,395


 




Fiscal
  year 2013


 


2,084


 


308,214


 


4,840


 




Fiscal
  year 2014


 


2,098


 


310,911


 


4,015


 




Future
  fiscal years


 


28,639


 


4,174,296


 


12,692


 




 


 


39,040


 


$


5,650,318


 


$


39,225


 




Less
  amounts representing interest


 


20,391


 


 


 


 


 




Net
  present value of capital lease obligations


 


18,649


 


 


 


 


 




Less
  current installments


 


389


 


 


 


 


 




Long-term
  capital lease obligations, less current installments


 


$


18,260


 


 


 


 


 



 
The
present values of future minimum obligations for capital leases shown above are
calculated based on interest rates determined at the inception of the lease, or
upon acquisition of the original lease.
 
During
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, we paid contingent rentals totaling
approximately $9.4 million, $10.8 million and $9.9 million, respectively.
During fiscal year 2007, we recorded an asset retirement obligation associated
with operating leases totaling approximately $825,000. No asset retirement
obligations associated with operating leases were incurred during fiscal year
2009 or 2008. Sublease rental income totaled approximately $6.3 million, $5.4
million and $3.9 million during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
John Mackey and Glenda Chamberlain, executive officers of the Company, own
approximately 51% and 2%, respectively, of BookPeople, Inc., a retailer of
books and periodicals that is unaffiliated with the Company, which leases
retail space in Austin, Texas from the Company. The lease is set to expire or
become subject to its renewal clause in 2015. The lease provides for an
aggregate annual minimum rent of approximately $0.5 million, $0.5 million, and
$0.4 million which the Company received in rental income in fiscal years 2009,
2008 and 2007, respectively.
 
(11) Income Taxes
 
Components
of income tax expense attributable to continuing operations are as follows (in
thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Current
  federal income tax


 


$


64,680


 


$


62,835


 


$


114,503


 




Current
  state income tax


 


23,974


 


22,906


 


34,138


 




Current
  foreign income tax


 


1,536


 


6,758


 


389


 




Total
  current tax


 


90,190


 


92,499


 


149,030


 




Deferred
  federal income tax


 


15,347


 


(1,086


)


(17,014


)




Deferred
  state income tax


 


(1,258


)


(1,589


)


(5,091


)




Deferred
  foreign income tax


 


(141


)


2,171


 


(5,098


)




Total
  deferred tax


 


13,948


 


(504


)


(27,203


)




Total income tax
  expense


 


$


104,138


 


$


91,995


 


$


121,827


 



 
58





Table of
Contents
 
Actual
income tax expense differed from the amount computed by applying statutory
corporate income tax rates to income from continuing operations before income
taxes as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Federal
  tax based on statutory rates


 


$


87,780


 


$


72,282


 


$


106,599


 




Increase
  (reduction) in income taxes resulting from:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Change
  in valuation allowance


 


967


 


—


 


(626


)




Tax
  exempt interest


 


—


 


(112


)


(1,010


)




Share-based
  compensation


 


33


 


(181


)


669


 




Deductible
  state income taxes


 


(7,951


)


(7,461


)


(10,167


)




Tax
  rate differential relating to foreign operations


 


(3,058


)


(4,953


)


—


 




Other,
  net


 


2,256


 


2,174


 


2,024


 




Total
  federal taxes


 


80,027


 


61,749


 


97,489


 




State
  income taxes


 


22,717


 


21,317


 


29,047


 




Foreign
  income taxes


 


1,394


 


8,929


 


(4,709


)




Total income tax
  expense


 


$


104,138


 


$


91,995


 


$


121,827


 



 
Current
income taxes payable as of September 27, 2009 totaled approximately $7.8
million. As of September 28, 2008 we had a current income taxes receivable
totaling approximately $24.0 million. The tax effects of temporary differences
that give rise to significant portions of the deferred tax assets and deferred
tax liabilities for continuing operations are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 




Deferred
  tax assets:


 


 


 


 


 




Compensation-related
  costs


 


$


68,675


 


$


61,373


 




Insurance-related
  costs


 


29,968


 


29,908


 




Inventories


 


1,975


 


4,143


 




Lease
  and other termination accruals


 


28,416


 


26,932


 




Rent
  differential


 


78,120


 


61,917


 




Deferred
  taxes associated with unrecognized tax benefit


 


4,967


 


7,779


 




Cash
  flow hedge instrument


 


7,960


 


4,865


 




Net
  domestic and international operating loss carryforwards


 


5,223


 


5,223


 




Tax
  credit carryforwards


 


124


 


124


 




Gross
  deferred tax assets


 


225,428


 


202,264


 




Valuation
  allowance


 


(6,292


)


(5,325


)




 


 


219,136


 


196,939


 




Deferred
  tax liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 




Financial
  basis of fixed assets in excess of tax basis


 


(37,295


)


(5,916


)




Capitalized
  costs expensed for tax purposes


 


(2,898


)


(472


)




Other


 


(186


)


(1,120


)




 


 


(40,379


)


(7,508


)




Net deferred tax
  asset


 


$


178,757


 


$


189,431


 



 
Deferred
taxes for continuing operations have been classified on the consolidated
balance sheets as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 




Current
  assets


 


$


87,757


 


$


80,429


 




Noncurrent
  assets


 


91,000


 


109,002


 




Net deferred tax
  asset


 


$


178,757


 


$


189,431


 



 
At
September 27, 2009, we had international operating loss carryforwards
totaling approximately $18.6 million, all of which have an indefinite life. We
have provided a valuation allowance totaling approximately $6.3 million for
deferred tax assets associated with international operating loss carryforwards,
federal credit carryforwards, and deferred tax assets associated with
unrecognized tax benefits, for which management has determined it is more
likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized. During fiscal
year 2009, the valuation allowance increased by approximately $1.0 million for
deferred tax assets associated with unrecognized tax benefits. Management
believes that it is more likely than not that we will fully realize the
remaining domestic deferred tax assets in the form of future tax deductions
based on the nature of these deductible temporary differences and a history of
profitable operations.
 
59





Table of
Contents
 
It
is the Company’s intention to utilize earnings in foreign operations for an
indefinite period of time, or to repatriate such earnings only when
tax-efficient to do so. If these amounts were distributed to the United States,
in the form of dividends or otherwise, the Company would be subject to
additional U.S. income taxes. Determination of the amount of unrecognized
deferred income tax liabilities on these earnings is not practicable because
such liability, if any, is dependent on circumstances existing if and when
remittance occurs.
 
At
September 27, 2009 the Company had unrecognized tax benefits totaling
approximately $13.2 million (not including accrued interest and penalties). The
aggregate changes in the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits, which
excludes interest and penalties, for the two years ended September 27,
2009, is as follows (in thousands):
 



Balance
  at October 1, 2007


 


$


16,087


 




Additions
  based on tax positions related to the current year


 


1,738


 




Additions
  for tax positions of prior years


 


3,870


 




Reductions
  for tax positions of prior years


 


(1,126


)




Lapse
  of statute of limitations


 


(549


)




Settlements


 


(108


)




Balance
  at September 28, 2008


 


$


19,912


 




Additions
  based on tax positions related to the current year


 


150


 




Additions
  for tax positions of prior years


 


3,422


 




Reductions
  for tax positions of prior years


 


(358


)




Lapse
  of statute of limitations


 


(255


)




Settlements


 


(9,673


)




Balance at
  September 27, 2009


 


$


13,198


 



 
The
Company’s total gross unrecognized tax benefits are classified in the “Other
long-term liabilities” line item on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.  If the Company were to prevail on all
unrecognized tax benefits recorded at September 27, 2009, the total gross
unrecognized tax benefit totaling approximately $13.2 million would benefit the
Company’s effective tax rate if recognized. At September 28, 2008
approximately $16.4 million of the $19.9 million reserve would benefit the
Company’s effective tax rate, if recognized. In addition, associated penalties
and interest previously recognized would also benefit the effective tax rate.
The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized
tax benefits within its global operations as a component of income tax
expense.  During the fiscal year ended September 27,
2009, we recorded approximately $1.0 million in interest and penalties. We had
accrued approximately $4.9 million and $6.9 million for the payment of interest
and penalties at September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008,
respectively.
 
The
Company and its domestic subsidiaries file income tax returns with federal,
state and local tax authorities within the United States. The Company’s foreign
affiliates file income tax returns in Canada and the United Kingdom. The IRS is
currently examining the Company’s federal tax returns for its fiscal years 2006
and 2005. With limited exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to federal
income tax examinations for fiscal years before 2005 and is no longer subject
to state and local income tax examinations for fiscal years before 2001.
 
Although
timing of the resolution and/or closure of state income tax audits is highly
uncertain, the Company believes it is reasonably possible that tax audit
resolutions could reduce its unrecognized tax benefits in the next 12 months.
As of September 27, 2009, the amount of unrecognized tax benefit which is
reasonably possible to result in payment of cash within 12 months, including
interest and penalties, is approximately $0.5 million.
 
(12) Redeemable Preferred Stock
 
On December 2, 2008,
the Company issued 425,000 shares of Series A 8% Redeemable, Convertible
Exchangeable Participating Preferred Stock, $0.01 par value per share (“Series A
Preferred Stock”) to affiliates of Leonard Green & Partners, L.P., for
approximately $413.1 million, net of approximately $11.9 million in closing and
issuance costs. On April 12, 2009, the Company amended and restated the
Statement of Designations governing the Series A Preferred Stock. This
amendment limited the participation feature, as described below, of the Series A
8% Redeemable, Convertible Exchangeable Preferred Stock and provided for the
mandatory payment of cash dividends in respect to the Series A Preferred
Stock. The amendment also restricted the Company’s ability to pay cash
dividends on its common stock without the prior written consent of the holders
representing at least a majority of the shares of Series A Preferred Stock
then outstanding.
 
The Series A
Preferred Stock was classified as temporary shareholders’ equity at September 27,
2009 since the shares were (i) redeemable at the option of the holder and (ii) had
conditions for redemption which are not solely within the control of the
Company. During fiscal year 2009, the Company paid cash dividends on the Series A
Preferred Stock totaling approximately $19.8 million.
 
60





Table of Contents
 
Subsequent to year end, on October 23, 2009, the
Company announced its intention to call all 425,000 outstanding shares of the Series A
Preferred Stock for redemption in accordance with the terms governing the Series A
Preferred Stock. Subject to conversion of the Series A Preferred Stock by
its holders, the Company planned to redeem such Series A Preferred Stock
on November 27, 2009 at a price per share equal to $1,000 plus accrued and
unpaid dividends. In accordance with the terms governing the Series A
Preferred Stock, at any time prior to the redemption date, the Series A
Preferred Stock could be converted by the holders thereof. On November 26,
2009 the holders converted all 425,000 outstanding shares of Series A
Preferred Stock into approximately 29.7 million shares of common stock of the
Company.
 
On December 2, 2008,
the Company announced that two partners of Leonard Green & Partners,
L.P., were elected to the Board pursuant to the terms governing the Series A
Preferred Stock. These two directors will continue to serve on the Board after November 26,
2009, the conversion date. Additionally, so long as the Leonard Green
affiliates continue to hold 10% or more of the voting stock of the Company, the
Company is obligated to nominate for election to the Board two individuals
designated by the affiliates of Leonard Green & Partners; provided
however, that if the affiliates of Leonard Green & Partners continue
to hold 7% or more of the voting stock of the Company but less than 10%, the
Company is obligated to nominate for election to the Board one individuals
designated by the affiliates of Leonard Green & Partners.
 
Description of Series A
Preferred Stock During Period Outstanding
 
Each share of Series A
Preferred Stock had an initial liquidation preference of $1,000, subject to
adjustment. Subject to limited exceptions, the outstanding shares could not be
transferred outside of the initial investor group prior to the third
anniversary of share issuance. The holders of the Series A Preferred Stock
were entitled to an 8% dividend, payable quarterly on the first day of each
calendar quarter in cash. Beginning three years after issuance, the dividend
would be reduced to (i) 6% if at any time the Company’s common stock
closes at or above $17.75 per share for at least 20 consecutive trading days,
or (ii) 4% if at any time the Company’s common stock closes at or above
$23.13 per share for at least 20 consecutive trading days. Also, in the event a
cash dividend or other distribution in cash was declared on the Company’s
common stock in an amount equal to or greater than the Company’s stock price on
the date of declaration, the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock were
entitled to receive an additional amount equal to the cash amount per share
distributed or to be distributed in respect of the common stock. To the extent
the Company failed to pay dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock in
cash, an amount equal to 12% of the liquidation preference of each share of the
Series A Preferred Stock would be added to the liquidation preference of
such share of Series A Preferred Stock.
 
The Series A Preferred Stock was convertible,
under certain circumstances, to common stock based on the quotient of (i) the
liquidation preference plus accrued dividends and (ii) 1,000, multiplied
by the conversion rate, initially 68.9655. The conversion rate was subject to
change based on certain customary antidilution provisions. The Series A
Preferred Stock was convertible at any time, at the election of the holders,
provided that at no time could any holder of the preferred shares beneficially
own more than 19.99% of the Company’s voting securities as a result of such
conversion. The Company reserved, and kept available out of its authorized and
unissued common stock, such number of shares that would be issued upon
conversion of all Series A Preferred Stock then outstanding. Shares
converted to common stock could not be transferred outside of the initial
investor group prior to the third anniversary of the initial Preferred Stock
issuance except under certain circumstances, including in the event that the Series A
Preferred Stock was called for redemption by the Company.
 
The Company had the option to exchange the Series A
Preferred Stock for subordinated convertible notes having economic terms
similar to the preferred stock under certain circumstances.
 
The Company had the right
to redeem the Series A Preferred Stock, in whole or in part, at any time
after December 2, 2013, at a premium of 4%, declining ratably in annual
increments to par on December 2, 2016, multiplied by the liquidation
preference plus accrued dividends. Additionally, at any time, the Company
could, upon 30 days notice, redeem the Series A Preferred Stock at par
plus accrued dividends if the common stock closed at or above $28.50 per share
for at least 20 consecutive trading days. On the redemption date, the
redemption payment would become due and payable and the dividends on the Series A
Preferred Stock would cease to accrue.
 
The holders of the Series A Preferred Stock had
the right to require the Company to redeem their shares of Series A
Preferred Stock, in whole or in part, at 101% of the liquidation preference
plus accrued dividends upon the occurrence of certain fundamental changes to
the Company, including a change of control and certain bankruptcy events. In
addition, the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock had the right to
require the Company to redeem their shares of Series A Preferred Stock at
par any time on or after December 2, 2020.
 
In the event of any liquidation, dissolution or
winding up of the affairs of the Company, whether voluntary or involuntary,
holders of the Series A Preferred Stock were entitled to receive for each
share, out of the assets of the Company or proceeds thereof (whether capital or
surplus) available for distribution to shareholders of the Company, and after
satisfaction of all liabilities and obligations to creditors of the Company,
before any distribution of such assets or proceeds is made to or set 
 
61





Table of Contents
 
aside for the holders of common stock, an amount equal
to the greater of (i) the liquidation preference per share of Series A
Preferred Stock plus accrued dividends and (ii) the per share amount of
all cash and other property to be distributed in respect of the common stock
such holder would have been entitled to had it converted such Series A
Preferred Stock immediately prior to the date fixed for such liquidation,
dissolution or winding up of the Company.
 
The holders of Series A
Preferred Stock had the right to veto certain actions of the Company that might
dilute, or alter the rights of, the Series A Preferred Stock. The Series A
Preferred Stock voted together with the common stock on an as-converted basis,
but no holder of Series A Preferred Stock could vote more than the
equivalent of 19.99% of the Company’s voting securities.
 
The holders of the Series A Preferred Stock,
voting as a separate class, were entitled to elect two members of the Board of
Directors of the Company. Additionally, the holders of the Series A
Preferred Stock were entitled to designate one member to each of the committees
of the Board of Directors and to appoint directors for election to the Board of
Directors once the ability to elect directors ceases, subject to applicable
government restrictions. Representation on the Board of Directors of the
Company would be reduced based on certain dilution percentages of the Company’s
voting securities and would cease once the Series A Preferred Stock
represented less than 7% of the Company’s voting securities.
 
(13) Shareholders’ Equity
 
Dividends
per Common Share
 
Following is a
summary of dividends declared per common share during fiscal year 2008 (in
thousands, except per share amounts):
 



Date of


 


Dividend per


 


Date of


 


Date of


 


Total


 




Declaration


 


Common Share


 


Record


 


Payment


 


Amount


 




November 20,
  2007


 


$


0.20


 


January 11,
  2008


 


January 22,
  2008


 


$


27,901


 




March 10,
  2008


 


0.20


 


April 11,
  2008


 


April 22,
  2008


 


28,041


 




June 11,
  2008


 


0.20


 


July 11,
  2008


 


July 22,
  2008


 


28,057


 

















 
During the fourth quarter
of fiscal year 2008, the Company’s Board of Directors suspended the quarterly
cash dividend on common shares for the foreseeable future.
 
Treasury Stock
 
During fiscal year 2008,
the Company’s Board of Directors approved a $100 million increase in the
Company’s stock repurchase program, bringing the total authorization to $400
million through November 8, 2009. During fiscal year 2008, the Company
retired all shares held in treasury, totaling approximately $200 million. The
Company’s remaining authorization under the stock repurchase program at September 27,
2009 was approximately $200 million. On November 8, 2009, the Company’s
stock repurchase program expired and was not renewed.
 
(14)
Comprehensive Income
 
Our comprehensive
income was comprised of net income, unrealized losses on cash flow hedge
instruments, including reclassification adjustments of unrealized losses to net
income related to ongoing interest payments, and foreign currency translation
adjustments, net of income taxes. Comprehensive income, net of related tax
effects, was as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 




Net
  income


 


$


146,804


 


$


114,524


 




Foreign
  currency translation adjustment, net


 


(8,748


)


(7,714


)




Reclassification
  adjustments for amount included in net income, net


 


8,440


 


2,302


 




Unrealized
  loss on cash flow hedge instruments, net


 


(13,481


)


(9,888


)




Comprehensive
  income


 


$


133,015


 


$


99,224


 



 
At September 27,
2009, accumulated other comprehensive income consisted of foreign currency
translation adjustment losses of approximately $0.7 million and unrealized
losses on cash flow hedge instruments of approximately $12.6 million, net of
related income tax effect of approximately $8.0 million.
 
62





Table of
Contents
 
(15) Earnings per Share
 
The computation of
basic earnings per share is based on the number of weighted average common
shares outstanding during the period.
 
The computation of
diluted earnings per share for fiscal year 2009 does not include options to
purchase approximately 16.5 million shares of common stock or the conversion of
Series A Preferred Stock to approximately 24.1 million shares of common
stock due to their antidilutive effect. The computation of diluted earnings per
share does not include approximately 70,000 shares of common stock related to
the zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures at the end of fiscal year
2008 and options to purchase approximately 13.4 million and 10.6 million shares
of common stock at the end of fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively, due to
their antidilutive effect.
 
A reconciliation
of the numerators and denominators of the basic and diluted earnings per share
calculations follows (in thousands, except per share amounts):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Income
  available to common shareholders (numerator for basic earnings per share)


 


$


118,754


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 




Interest
  on 5% zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


98


 




Adjusted
  income available to common shareholders (numerator for diluted earnings per
  share)


 


$


118,754


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,838


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Weighted
  average common shares outstanding (denominator for basic earnings per share)


 


140,414


 


139,886


 


140,088


 




Potential
  common shares outstanding:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Assumed
  conversion of 5% zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures


 


—


 


—


 


116


 




Incremental
  shares from assumed exercise of stock options


 


—


 


125


 


1,632


 




Weighted
  average common shares outstanding and potential additional common shares
  outstanding (denominator for diluted earnings per share)


 


140,414


 


140,011


 


141,836


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic
  earnings per share


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.30


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Diluted earnings per share


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.29


 



 
(16) Share-Based Payments
 
Share-based payment
expense before income taxes recognized during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007
was approximately $12.8 million, $10.5 million and $13.2 million, respectively.
Share-based payment expense was included in the following line items on the
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Cost
  of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


$


439


 


$


233


 


$


475


 




Direct
  store expenses


 


7,152


 


5,300


 


7,093


 




General
  and administrative expenses


 


5,204


 


4,972


 


5,607


 




Share-based
  payment expense before income taxes


 


12,795


 


10,505


 


13,175


 




Income
  tax benefit


 


(5,222


)


(4,815


)


(4,114


)




Net share-based
  payment expense


 


$


7,573


 


$


5,690


 


$


9,061


 



 
Stock Option Plan
 
We grant options to
purchase common stock under our Whole Foods Market 2009 Stock Incentive Plan,
which was approved at our annual shareholders’ meeting on March 16, 2009
and replaces the Whole Foods Market 2007 Stock Incentive Plan. All options
outstanding are governed by the original terms and conditions of the grants.
Options are granted at an option price equal to the market value of the stock
at the grant date and are generally exercisable ratably over a four-year period
beginning one year from grant date. Options granted expire five or seven years
from the date of grant. The market value of the stock is determined as the
closing stock price at the grant date. At September 27, 2009, September 28,
2008 and September 30, 2007 approximately 15.4 million, 4.5 million and
5.5 million shares of our common stock, respectively, were available for future
stock option grants.
 
63





Table of Contents
 
The following table summarizes
option activity (in thousands, except per share amounts and contractual lives
in years):
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Weighted


 


 


 




 


 


Number


 


Weighted


 


Average


 


Aggregate


 




 


 


of Options


 


Average


 


Remaining


 


Intrinsic


 




 


 


Outstanding


 


Exercise
  Price


 


Contractual
  Life


 


Value


 




Outstanding
  options at September 24, 2006


 


18,275


 


$


48.82


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  granted


 


1,704


 


39.77


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  exercised


 


(1,879


)


26.30


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  expired


 


(704


)


60.64


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  forfeited


 


(185


)


58.70


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding
  options at September 30, 2007


 


17,211


 


$


49.80


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  granted


 


2,249


 


27.59


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  exercised


 


(973


)


15.73


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  expired


 


(842


)


55.64


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  forfeited


 


(215


)


43.18


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding
  options at September 28, 2008


 


17,430


 


$


48.64


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  granted


 


2,714


 


18.73


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  exercised


 


(62


)


25.38


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  expired


 


(1,506


)


39.46


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  forfeited


 


(259


)


34.05


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding
  options at September 27, 2009


 


18,317


 


$


45.24


 


3.06


 


$


30,531


 




Vested/expected
  to vest at September 27, 2009


 


17,817


 


$


45.89


 


2.99


 


$


26,882


 




Exercisable
  options at September 27, 2009


 


13,091


 


$


52.52


 


2.33


 


$


1,822


 



 
The
weighted average fair values of options granted during fiscal years 2009, 2008
and 2007 were $7.75, $6.46, and $9.76, respectively. The aggregate intrinsic
values of stock options at exercise, represented in the table above, was
approximately $0.2 million during fiscal year 2009 and $20.9 million during
fiscal year 2008. As of the end of fiscal years 2009 and 2008, there was
approximately $34.3 million and $29.8 million of unrecognized share-based
payment expense, respectively, related to nonvested stock options, net of
estimated forfeitures, related to approximately 4.7 million and 3.6 million
shares, respectively. We anticipate this expense to be recognized over a
weighted average period of approximately three years.
 
A
summary of options outstanding and exercisable at September 27, 2009
follows (share amounts in thousands):
 



 


 


Options Outstanding


 


Options Exercisable


 




 


 


 


 


Weighted Average


 


Weighted


 


 


 


Weighted


 




Range of Exercise Prices


 


Number


 


Remaining


 


Average


 


Number


 


Average


 




From


 


To


 


Outstanding


 


Life (in Years)


 


Exercise Price


 


Exercisable


 


Exercise Price


 




$


11.12


 


$


18.90


 


2,678


 


6.58


 


$


18.69


 


3


 


$


18.08


 




21.62


 


27.82


 


3,167


 


2.50


 


27.65


 


1,658


 


27.69


 




28.03


 


51.83


 


3,677


 


2.05


 


39.63


 


2,920


 


39.71


 




54.17


 


60.74


 


3,555


 


2.59


 


54.23


 


3,555


 


54.23


 




66.81


 


73.14


 


5,240


 


2.65


 


67.28


 


4,955


 


67.18


 




Total


 


 


 


18,317


 


3.06


 


$


45.24


 


13,091


 


$


52.52


 























 
Share-based payment
expense related to vesting stock options recognized during fiscal years 2009,
2008 and 2007 totaled approximately $13.3 million, $10.5 million, and $8.1
million, respectively.
 
During
fiscal years 2009 and 2007, to adjust for actual experience, the Company
recognized a credit adjustment of approximately $0.5 million and an additional
charge of $4.4 million, respectively, to share-based payment expense related to
the option acceleration that took place in fiscal year 2005. No adjustment
related to the acceleration was recorded in fiscal year 2008.
 
The
Company also recognized share-based payment expense totaling approximately $0.2
million, and $0.3 million for modifications of terms of certain stock option
grants and other compensation during fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively.
There were no modifications of terms in fiscal year 2009.
 
64





Table of Contents
 
The fair value of stock
option grants has been estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes
option pricing model with the following weighted average assumptions:
 



 


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 




Expected
  dividend yield


 


0.00


%


2.90


%


1.80


%




Risk-free
  interest rate


 


1.56


%


2.32


%


4.75


%




Expected
  volatility


 


52.31


%


36.73


%


31.22


%




Expected life,
  in years


 


3.97


 


3.38


 


3.29


 



 
Risk-free interest rate
is based on the U.S. treasury yield curve on the date of the grant for the time
period equal to the expected term of the grant. Expected volatility is
calculated using a ratio of implied volatility based on comparable Long-Term
Equity Anticipation Securities (“LEAPS”) and four-year historical volatility.
The Company determined the use of implied volatility versus historical
volatility represents a more accurate calculation of option fair value.
Expected life is calculated in two tranches based on weighted average
percentage of unexpired options and exercise-after-vesting information over the
last five or seven years. Unvested options are included in the term calculation
using the “mid-point scenario” which assumes that unvested options will be
exercised half-way between vest and expiration date. The assumptions used to calculate the fair value of options granted are
evaluated and revised, as necessary, to reflect market conditions and
experience.
 
In
addition to the above valuation assumptions, the Company estimates an annual
forfeiture rate for unvested options and adjusts fair value expense
accordingly. The company monitors actual forfeiture experience and adjusts the
rate from time to time as necessary.
 
Team Member Stock Purchase Plan
 
Our
Company offers a team member stock purchase plan to all full-time team members
with a minimum of 400 hours of service. Participating team members may purchase
our common stock through payroll deductions. At our 2007 annual meeting,
shareholders approved a new Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (“TMSPP”) which
became effective on April 1, 2007. The TMSPP replaces all previous stock
purchase plans and provides for a 5% discount on the shares purchase date
market value which meets the share-based payment, “Safe Harbor” provisions, and
therefore is non-compensatory. As a result, no future compensation expense will
be recognized for our employee stock purchase plan. Under the previous plans,
participating team members could elect to purchase unrestricted shares at 100%
of market value or restricted shares at 85% of market value on the purchase
date.
 
In fiscal year 2007, we
recognized approximately $0.3 million of share-based payment expense related to
team member stock purchase plan discounts. Under the TMSPP, we issued
approximately 194,000, 68,000 and 83,000 shares in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and
2007, respectively.  At September 27,
2009, September 28, 2008 and September 30, 2007 approximately
502,000, 218,000, and 286,000 shares of our common stock, respectively, were
available for future issuance.
 
(17) Team Member 401(k) Plan
 
Our Company offers a team member 401(k) plan to
all team members with a minimum of 1,000 services hours in one year.  In fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, the
Company made a matching contribution to the plan of approximately $3.7 million,
$3.0 million, and $2.3 million, respectively, in cash.
 
(18) Quarterly Results (unaudited)
 
The
Company’s first quarter consists of 16 weeks, the second and third quarters
each are 12 weeks, and the fourth quarters is 12 or 13 weeks. Fiscal years 2009
and 2008 are 52-week years with twelve weeks in the fourth quarter. Because the
first quarter is longer than the remaining quarters, it typically represents a
larger share of our annual sales from existing stores. Quarter to quarter
comparisons of results of operations have been and may be materially impacted
by the timing of new store openings. The Company believes that the following
information reflects all normal recurring adjustments necessary for a fair
presentation of the information for the periods presented. The operating
results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any
future period.
 
During the third quarter of fiscal year 2009, the
Company recorded store closure reserve adjustments totaling approximately $9.7
million related to changes in certain subtenant income estimated driven by the
outlook for the commercial real estate market, which was included in “Relocation,
store closure and lease termination costs.”
 
During
the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, “Relocation, store closure and lease
termination costs” include charges recorded totaling approximately $14.7
million to increase store closure reserves for increased estimated net lease
obligations for closed Wild Oats stores
and approximately $5.5 million in costs related to 13 lease terminations for
stores previously in development.
 
65





Table of
Contents
 
The Company’s effective tax rate for the fourth
quarter and fiscal year 2008 was higher than its historical rate primarily due
to repatriation of approximately $59.8 million in cash from the Company’s
Canadian subsidiary.
 
The following tables set forth selected quarterly
unaudited consolidated statements of operations information for the fiscal
years ended September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008 (in thousands
except per share amounts):
 



 


 


First


 


Second


 


Third


 


Fourth


 




 


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 




Fiscal Year 2009


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Sales


 


$


2,466,503


 


$


1,857,550


 


$


1,878,338


 


$


1,829,229


 




Cost
  of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


1,643,785


 


1,212,233


 


1,218,029


 


1,203,263


 




Gross
  profit


 


822,718


 


645,317


 


660,309


 


625,966


 




Direct
  store expenses


 


653,974


 


500,392


 


499,830


 


491,613


 




General
  and administrative expenses


 


82,600


 


56,832


 


52,592


 


51,725


 




Pre-opening
  expenses


 


14,064


 


13,789


 


10,763


 


10,602


 




Relocation,
  store closure and lease termination costs


 


5,077


 


4,651


 


18,209


 


3,248


 




Operating
  income


 


67,003


 


69,653


 


78,915


 


68,778


 




Interest
  expense


 


(13,580


)


(7,696


)


(7,688


)


(7,892


)




Investment
  and other income (loss)


 


1,841


 


(639


)


1,326


 


921


 




Income
  before income taxes


 


55,264


 


61,318


 


72,553


 


61,807


 




Provision
  for income taxes


 


22,935


 


26,060


 


29,746


 


25,397


 




Net
  income


 


32,329


 


35,258


 


42,807


 


36,410


 




Preferred
  stock dividends


 


4,533


 


7,934


 


7,839


 


7,744


 




Income
  available to common shareholders


 


$


27,796


 


$


27,324


 


$


34,968


 


$


28,666


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic
  earnings per share


 


$


0.20


 


$


0.19


 


$


0.25


 


$


0.20


 




Diluted
  earnings per share


 


$


0.20


 


$


0.19


 


$


0.25


 


$


0.20


 




Dividends
  declared per common share


 


$


—


 


$


—


 


$


—


 


$


—


 



 



 


 


First


 


Second


 


Third


 


Fourth


 




 


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 




Fiscal Year 2008


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Sales


 


$


2,457,258


 


$


1,866,493


 


$


1,841,242


 


$


1,788,919


 




Cost
  of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


1,630,706


 


1,215,089


 


1,208,495


 


1,192,917


 




Gross
  profit


 


826,552


 


651,404


 


632,747


 


596,002


 




Direct
  store expenses


 


644,375


 


496,903


 


490,188


 


476,474


 




General
  and administrative expenses


 


87,412


 


67,658


 


60,689


 


54,669


 




Pre-opening
  expenses


 


15,139


 


10,039


 


15,225


 


15,151


 




Relocation,
  store closure and lease termination costs


 


5,012


 


1,818


 


2,556


 


27,159


 




Operating
  income


 


74,614


 


74,986


 


64,089


 


22,549


 




Interest
  expense


 


(11,581


)


(8,438


)


(8,094


)


(8,303


)




Investment
  and other income


 


2,754


 


1,181


 


1,495


 


1,267


 




Income
  before income taxes


 


65,787


 


67,729


 


57,490


 


15,513


 




Provision
  for income taxes


 


26,644


 


27,769


 


23,571


 


14,011


 




Net
  income


 


39,143


 


39,960


 


33,919


 


1,502


 




Preferred
  stock dividends


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 




Income
  available to common shareholders


 


$


39,143


 


$


39,960


 


$


33,919


 


$


1,502


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic
  earnings per share


 


$


0.28


 


$


0.29


 


$


0.24


 


$


0.01


 




Diluted
  earnings per share


 


$


0.28


 


$


0.29


 


$


0.24


 


$


0.01


 




Dividends
  declared per common share


 


$


0.20


 


$


0.20


 


$


0.20


 


$


—


 



 
(19) Commitments and Contingencies
 
The Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance
plans to provide for the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation,
general liability, property insurance, director and officers’ liability
insurance, vehicle liability and employee health care benefits. Liabilities
associated with the risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in
part, by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors,
severity factors and other actuarial assumptions. While we believe that our
assumptions are appropriate, the estimated accruals for these liabilities could
be significantly affected if future occurrences and claims differ from these
assumptions and historical trends.
 
66





Table of Contents
 
From time to time we are
a party to legal proceedings including matters involving personnel and
employment issues, personal injury, intellectual property, real estate and
other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. The Company has
established loss provisions for matters in which losses are probable and the
amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. The Company does not believe that
any of these proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business, either alone
or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s
results of operations, cash flows or financial condition. Although management
does not expect that the outcome in these proceedings will have a material
adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations, litigation
is inherently unpredictable. Therefore, we could incur judgments or enter into
settlements of claims that could materially impact our results.
 
On October 27, 2008, Whole Foods Market was
served with the complaint in Kottaras v. Whole Foods Market, Inc., a
putative class action filed in the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia, seeking treble damages, equitable, injunctive, and
declaratory relief and alleging that the acquisition and merger between Whole
Foods Market and Wild Oats violates various provisions of the federal antitrust
laws. This case is in the preliminary stages. Whole Foods Market cannot at this
time predict the likely outcome of this judicial proceeding or estimate the
amount or range of loss or possible loss that may arise from it. The Company
has not accrued any loss related to the outcome of this case as of September 27,
2009.
 
The Company has entered
into Retention Agreements with certain executive officers of the Company or its
subsidiaries which provide for certain benefits upon an involuntary termination
of employment, other than for cause, after a “Triggering Event.” A Triggering
Event includes a merger of the Company with and into an unaffiliated
corporation if the Company is not the surviving corporation or the sale of all
or substantially all of the Company’s assets. The benefits to be received by
the executive officer whose employment is terminated after a Triggering Event
occurs include receipt of his or her annual salary through the one-year period
following the date of the termination of employment and the immediate vesting
of any outstanding stock options granted to such executive officer.
 
(20) Subsequent Event
 
During fiscal year 2009,
the Company adopted FASB guidance that establishes general standards for the
disclosure of events that occur after the balance sheet date but before the
financial statements are issued or available to be issued, including the
required disclosure of the date through which an entity has evaluated
subsequent events and the basis for that date. The Company evaluated subsequent
events and transactions for potential recognition or disclosure in the
financial statements through November 27, 2009, the date the financial
statements were issued.
 
As discussed in Note 12 to the consolidated financial
statements, “Redeemable Preferred Stock,” on November 26, 2009 the holders
of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock converted all outstanding shares
into approximately 29.7 million shares of Company common stock, bringing the
total number of common shares outstanding to approximately 170.3 million
shares.
 
67





Table of Contents
 
Item 9.      Changes
in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
 
None.
 
Item 9A.   Controls and Procedures.
 
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls
and Procedures
 
The Company’s management,
with the participation of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief
Financial Officer, has evaluated the effectiveness of the Company’s disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)) as of the
end of the period covered by this report. Based on such evaluation, the Company’s
Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that, as of
the end of such period, the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures were
effective as of the end of the period covered by this report.
 
Changes in Internal Control over
Financial Reporting
 
There have been no
changes in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting (as defined
in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) during
the most recent fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably
likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control over financial
reporting.
 
Management’s Report on Internal
Control over Financial Reporting
 
The Company’s management
is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under
the Exchange Act.
 
Because of its inherent
limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to
future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the
policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
Under the supervision and
with the participation of the Company’s management, including our principal
executive officer and principal financial officer, the Company conducted an
evaluation of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial
reporting based on criteria established in the framework in Internal Control — Integrated Framework
issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
Based on this evaluation, the Company’s management concluded that its internal
control over financial reporting was effective as of September 27, 2009.
 
The Company’s independent
registered public accounting firm, Ernst & Young LLP, audited the
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting. Ernst &
Young LLP has issued their attestation report which is included in Part II,
Item 8 of this Report on Form 10-K.
 
Item 9B.   Other Information.
 
The following
disclosure would otherwise be filed in Form 8-K under “Item 3.02. Unregistered
Sales of Equity Securities:”
 
On December 2, 2008, the Company issued 425,000 shares of Series A
8% Redeemable, Convertible Exchangeable Participating Preferred Stock, $0.01
par value per share (“Series A Preferred Stock”) to affiliates of Leonard
Green & Partners, L.P., for approximately $413.1 million, net of
approximately $11.9 million in closing and issuance costs. Subsequent to the
end of fiscal year 2009, on October 23, 2009 the Company announced its
intention to call all 425,000 outstanding shares of the Series A Preferred
Stock for redemption in accordance with the terms governing such Series A
Preferred Stock. Subject to conversion of the Series A Preferred Stock by
its holders, the Company planned to redeem such Series A Preferred Stock
on November 27, 2009 at a price per share equal to $1,000 plus accrued and
unpaid dividends. In accordance with the terms governing the Series A
Preferred Stock, at any time prior to the redemption date, the Series A
Preferred Stock could be converted by the holders thereof. On November 26,
2009 the holders of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock converted all
outstanding shares into approximately 29.7 million shares of Company common
stock, bringing the total number of common shares outstanding to approximately
170.3 million shares. The shares of common stock will be issued using a
transaction exempt from registration pursuant to Section 3(a)(9) of
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
 
68





Table
of Contents
 
PART III
 
Item 10.   Directors
and Executive Officers of the Registrant.
 
The information required
by this item about our Company’s Executive Officers is included in Part I,
“Item 1. Business” of this Report on Form 10-K under the caption “Executive
Officers of the Registrant.” All other information required by this item is
incorporated herein by reference from the registrant’s definitive Proxy
Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held March 8, 2010
to be filed with the Commission pursuant to Regulation 14A.
 
The Company has
adopted a Code of Conduct and Ethics for Team Members and Directors pursuant to
section 406 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. A copy of our Code of Conduct and Ethics
is publicly available on our Company website at
http://www.wholefoodsmarket.com/company/pdfs/codeofconduct.pdf
The information contained on our website is not incorporated by reference into
this Report on Form 10-K.
 
Item 11.   Executive Compensation.
 
The information required
by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the registrant’s
definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 
Item 12.   Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management.
 
The information required
by this item about our Company’s securities authorized for issuance under
equity compensation plans as of September 27, 2009 is included in Part I,
“Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities” of this Report on Form 10-K. All
other information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference
from the registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of
Shareholders.
 
Item 13.   Certain
Relationships and Related Transactions.
 
The information required
by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the registrant’s
definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 
Item 14.   Principal
Accounting Fees and Services.
 
The information required
by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the registrant’s
definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 
69





Table of Contents
 
PART IV
 
Item 15.   Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.
 



(a)


The following documents
  are filed as part of this report:




 


 


 




 


(1)


Consolidated Financial
  Statements: See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.




 


(2)


Financial Statement
  Schedules: No schedules are required.




 


(2)


Exhibits are
  incorporated herein by reference or are filed with this report as indicated
  below.




 


 


 




(b)


Exhibits



 



3.1


Amended and Restated
  Articles of Incorporation of the Registrant, dated March 24, 2006 (13)




3.2


Articles of Amendment
  to the Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation of the Registrant,
  dated April 13, 2009 (13)




3.3


Amended and Restated
  By-laws of the Registrant adopted August 13, 2008 (7)




4.1


Form of Zero
  Coupon Convertible Subordinated Debentures Due 2018 (3)




4.2


Series A Preferred
  Stock Registration Rights Agreement (5)




4.3


Form of
  Series A Preferred Stock Certificate (5)




10.1


Form of Retention
  Agreement between the executive officers of the Registrant and the Registrant
  (2)




10.2


Form of amendment
  to Retention Agreement (1)




10.3


Form of
  Director & Officer Indemnification Agreement (6)




10.4


1993 Team Member Stock
  Ownership Plan (1)




10.5


1993 Team Member Stock
  Purchase Plan (1)




10.6


1992 Stock Option Plan
  for Team Members, as amended (1)




10.7


1992 Stock Option Plan
  for Outside Directors (1)




10.8


2007 Stock Incentive
  Plan (10)




10.9


Amendment No. One
  to the Whole Foods Market 2007 Stock Incentive Plan (7)




10.10


2009 Stock Incentive
  Plan (12)




10.11


2007 Team Member Stock
  Purchase Plan (11)




10.12


Agreement for
  Distribution of Products by and between Whole Foods Market
  Distribution, Inc. and United Natural Foods, Inc. (Portions of this
  agreement have been omitted pursuant to a request for confidential treatment
  filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission) (9)




10.13


Agreement and Plan of
  Merger dated as of February 21, 2007, by and among Registrant and Wild
  Oats Markets, Inc. (4)




10.14


Term Loan Agreement
  dated August 28, 2007 by and among Registrant, Royal Bank of Canada;
  JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.; Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; Wachovia Bank, N.A.;
  LaSalle Bank Midwest, N.A.;  RBC Capital Markets; and J.P. Morgan
  Securities Inc. (Portions of this Agreement have been omitted pursuant to a
  request for Confidential Treatment filed with the Securities and Exchange
  Commission) (8)




10.15


Revolving Credit
  Agreement dated August 28, 2007 by and among Registrant, JPMorgan Chase
  Bank, N.A.; Royal Bank of Canada; Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; J.P. Morgan
  Securities Inc.; and RBC Capital Markets (Portions of this Agreement have
  been omitted pursuant to a request for Confidential Treatment filed with the
  Securities and Exchange Commission) (8)




10.16


First Amendment, dated
  June 2, 2008, of Revolving Credit Agreement dated August 28, 2007
  by and among Registrant, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.; Royal Bank of Canada;
  Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; J.P. Morgan Securities Inc.; and RBC Capital Markets
  (Portions of this Agreement have been omitted pursuant to a request for
  Confidential Treatment filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission) (7)




10.17


Securities Purchase
  Agreement dated November 5, 2008, among Whole Foods Market, Inc.,
  Green Equity Investors V, L.P., Green Equity Investors Side V, L.P. and Thyme
  Coinvest, LLC (5)




10.18


Amendment No. 1,
  dated April 12, 2009, to the Securities Purchase Agreement dated
  November 5, 2008, among Whole Foods Market, Inc., Green Equity
  Investors V, L.P., Green Equity Investors Side V, L.P. and Thyme Coinvest,
  LLC (6)




12.1


Computation of Ratio of
  Earnings to Fixed Charges (13)




21.1


Subsidiaries of the
  Registrant (13)




23.1


Consent of
  Ernst & Young LLP (13)




31.1


Certification by Chief
  Executive Officer pursuant to 17 CFR 240.13a-14(a) (13)




31.2


Certification by Chief
  Financial Officer pursuant to 17 CFR 240.13a-14(a) (13)




32.1


Certification by Chief
  Executive Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 (13)




32.2


Certification by Chief
  Financial Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 (13)



 
 
70





Table
of Contents
 



(1)


Filed as an exhibit to
  Registration Statement on Form S-4 (No. 33-63824) and incorporated
  herein by reference.




(2)


Filed as an exhibit to
  Registration Statement on Form S-1 (No. 33-44214) and incorporated
  herein by reference.




(3)


Filed as an exhibit to
  Registration Statement on Form S-3, filed April 30, 1998
  (No. 333-51419) and incorporated herein by reference.




(4)


Filed as an exhibit to
  Registrant’s Form 8-K filed February 21, 2007 and incorporated
  herein by reference.




(5)


Filed as an exhibit to
  Registrant’s Form 8-K filed December 2, 2008 and incorporated
  herein by reference.




(6)


Filed as an exhibit to
  Registrant’s Form 8-K filed April 16, 2009 and incorporated herein
  by reference.




(7)


Filed as an exhibit to
  Registrant’s Form 10-Q for the period ended July 6, 2008 filed
  August 15, 2008 and incorporated herein by reference.




(8)


Filed as an exhibit to
  Registrant’s Form 10-Q for the period ended April 12, 2009 filed
  May 22, 2009 and incorporated herein by reference.




(9)


Filed as an exhibit to
  Registrant’s Form 10-K for the period ended September 24, 2006
  filed December 8, 2006 and incorporated herein by reference.




(10)


Filed as Appendix B to
  Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of
  Stockholders held March 5, 2007 filed January 22, 2007 and
  incorporated herein by reference.




(11)


Filed as Appendix C to
  Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Stockholders
  held March 5, 2007 filed January 22, 2007 and incorporated herein
  by reference.




(12)


Filed as Appendix A to
  Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of
  Stockholders held March 16, 2009 filed January 26, 2009 and
  incorporated herein by reference.




(13)


Filed herewith.



 
 
71





Table of
Contents
 
SIGNATURES
 
Pursuant to the
requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly
authorized.
 
WHOLE FOODS MARKET, INC.
 



Date: November 27,
  2009


By:


/s/ Glenda Chamberlain




 


 


Glenda Chamberlain




 


 


Executive Vice
  President and Chief Financial Officer



 
Pursuant to the
requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities indicated on November 27, 2009.
 



Name


 


Title




 


 


 




/s/
  John Mackey


 


 




John Mackey


 


Chairman of the Board,
  Chief Executive Officer and Director




 


 


(Principal
  Executive Officer)




 


 


 




/s/ Glenda Chamberlain


 


 




Glenda Chamberlain


 


Executive Vice
  President and Chief Financial Officer




 


 


(Principal
  Financial and Accounting Officer)




 


 


 




/s/ Dr. John B.
  Elstrott


 


 




Dr. John B.
  Elstrott


 


Director




 


 


 




 


 


 




/s/ Gabrielle E. Greene


 


 




Gabrielle E. Greene


 


Director




 


 


 




 


 


 




/s/ Shahid M. Hassan


 


 




Shahid M. Hassan


 


Director




 


 


 




 


 


 




/s/ Stephanie Kugelman


 


 




Stephanie Kugelman


 


Director




 


 


 




 


 


 




/s/ Jonathan A. Seiffer


 


 




Jonathan A. Seiffer


 


Director




 


 


 




 


 


 




/s/ Morris J. Siegel


 


 




Morris J. Siegel


 


Director




 


 


 




 


 


 




/s/ Jonathan D.
  Sokoloff


 


 




Jonathan D. Sokoloff


 


Director




 


 


 




 


 


 




/s/ Dr. Ralph Z
  Sorenson


 


 




Dr. Ralph Z.
  Sorenson


 


Director




 


 


 




 


 


 




/s/ William A. Tindell


 


 




William A Tindell


 


Director



 
72





