
10-K
1
a10-19737_110k.htm
10-K


Table of Contents
 

 

 
UNITED
STATES
SECURITIES
AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 
20549
 
FORM 10-K
 
ANNUAL
REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF
THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
 
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 26, 2010
 
COMMISSION FILE NUMBER:  0-19797
 
WHOLE
FOODS MARKET, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its
charter)
 




Texas


 


74-1989366




(State of incorporation)


 


(IRS Employer Identification No.)




 
550 Bowie St.
Austin,
Texas  78703
(Address
of principal executive offices)
 
Registrant’s telephone number, including area
code:
512-477-4455
 
Securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of
the Act:
Common Stock, no par value
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned
issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.
Yes x  No o
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.
Yes o  No x
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all
reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes x  No o
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted
electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive
Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of
Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that
the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes x  No o
 
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained,
to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or
any amendment to this Form 10-K. o
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated
filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting
company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).
 



Large
  accelerated filer x


 


Accelerated
  filer o




Non-accelerated
  filer o (Do not check if a
  smaller reporting company)


 


Smaller
  reporting company o



 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as
defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o  No x
 
The aggregate market value of all common stock held by non-affiliates
of the registrant as of April 11, 2010 was $6,589,496,771.  The number of shares of the registrant’s
common stock, no par value, outstanding as of November 19, 2010 was 172,953,403.
 
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
 
The information required by Part III of this report, to the extent
not set forth herein, is incorporated by reference from the Registrant’s
definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of the Stockholders to be
held February 28, 2011.
 

 

 





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Annual Report on Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended September 26, 2010
 
Table of Contents
 



 


 


Page




 


 


Number




 


 


 




 


PART I


 




 


 


 




Item 1.


Business


3




Item 1A.


Risk Factors


10




Item 1B.


Unresolved
  Staff Comments


14




Item 2.


Properties


14




Item 3.


Legal Proceedings


15




Item 4.


Removed and
  Reserved


15




 


 


 




 


PART II


 




 


 


 




Item 5.


Market for
  Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases
  of Equity Securities


16




Item 6.


Selected
  Financial Data


17




Item 7.


Management’s
  Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations


18




Item 7A.


Quantitative
  and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk


27




Item 8.


Financial
  Statements and Supplementary Data


29




Item 9.


Changes in
  and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure


56




Item 9A.


Controls and
  Procedures


56




Item 9B.


Other Information


56




 


 


 




 


PART III


 




 


 


 




Item 10.


Directors,
  Executive Officers and Corporate Governance


57




Item 11.


Executive
  Compensation


57




Item 12.


Security
  Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder
  Matters


57




Item 13.


Certain
  Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence


57




Item 14.


Principal
  Accountant Fees and Services


57




 


 


 




 


PART IV


 




 


 


 




Item 15.


Exhibits
  and Financial Statement Schedules


58




 


 


 




SIGNATURES


60



 
2

 




Table of
Contents
 
This
Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning
of Section 21E of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 concerning our
current expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections about the future.
These forward-looking statements are based on currently available operating,
financial and competitive information and are
subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results
to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements.
See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for a discussion of risks and uncertainties that
may affect our business.
 
PART I
 
Item 1.      Business.
 
General
 
Whole
Foods Market is the world’s leading natural and organic foods supermarket and
America’s first national “Certified Organic” grocer. Unless otherwise
specified, references to “Whole Foods Market,” “Company,” or “We” in this
Report include the Company and its consolidated, wholly owned subsidiaries. The
Company was formed in 1980 and is based in Austin, Texas. We completed our
initial public offering in January 1992, and our common stock trades on
the NASDAQ Global Select Market (“NASDAQ”) under the symbol “WFMI.” Our Company
mission is to promote the vitality and well-being of all individuals by
supplying the highest quality, most wholesome foods available. Since the purity
of our food and the health of our bodies are directly related to the purity and
health of our environment, our core mission is devoted to the promotion of
organically grown foods, food safety concerns, and the sustainability of our
entire ecosystem. Through our growth, we have had a significant and positive
impact on the natural and organic foods movement throughout the United States,
helping lead the industry to nationwide acceptance over the last 30 years.
 
We
have one operating segment, natural and organic foods supermarkets. As of September 26,
2010 we operated 299 stores in the United States, Canada, and the United
Kingdom. Our stores average 37,600 square feet in size and nine years in age,
and are supported by our Austin headquarters, regional offices, distribution
centers, bakehouse facilities, commissary kitchens, seafood-processing
facilities, meat and produce procurement centers, and a specialty coffee, tea
procurement and brewing operation.
 
The
following is a summary of our annual percentage sales and net long-lived assets
by geographic area:
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Sales:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




United States


 


97.0


%


97.2


%


96.5


%




Canada and United Kingdom


 


3.0


%


2.8


%


3.5


%




Total sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%




Long-lived assets, net:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




United States


 


96.6


%


96.5


%


96.4


%




Canada and United Kingdom


 


3.4


%


3.5


%


3.6


%




Total long-lived assets, net


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
The Natural and Organic Products Industry
 
According
to a leading trade publication for the industry, sales of natural products
across all retail and direct-to-consumer channels grew to approximately $76
billion in 2009, a 5% increase over the prior year. We believe the growth in
sales of natural and organic foods is being driven by numerous factors,
including:
 
·                  heightened awareness of the role that food
and nutrition play in long-term health, which has led to healthier eating
patterns;
·                  a better-educated and wealthier populace
whose median age is increasing each year;
·                  increasing consumer concern over the purity
and safety of food due to the presence of pesticide residues, growth hormones,
artificial ingredients and other chemicals, and genetically engineered
ingredients; and
·                  environmental concerns due to the degradation
of water and soil quality.
 
Our Core Values
 
We
believe that much of our success to date is because we remain a uniquely
mission-driven Company. Our core values succinctly express the purpose of our
business, which is not only to make profits but to create value for all of our
major stakeholders, each of which is linked interdependently. By maintaining
our core values, regardless of how large we become, we are able to preserve what
has always been special about our Company.
 
3





Table of
Contents
 
Our
core values are:
 
·                  Selling the highest quality natural and
organic products available;
·                  Satisfying and delighting our customers;
·                  Supporting team member happiness and
excellence;
·                  Creating wealth through profits and growth;
·                  Caring about our communities and our environment;
·                  Creating ongoing win-win partnerships with
our suppliers; and
·                  Promoting the health of our stakeholders
through healthy eating education.
 
Products
 
We
offer a broad and differentiated selection of high-quality natural and organic
products with a strong emphasis on perishable foods. Our product selection
includes, but is not limited to: produce, seafood, grocery, meat and poultry,
bakery, prepared foods and catering, specialty (beer, wine and cheese), coffee
and tea, nutritional supplements, vitamins, body care and educational products
such as books, floral, pet products and household products. We estimate our
stores carry on average approximately 20,500 SKUs.
 
The
following is a summary of annual percentage sales by product category:
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Grocery


 


33.5


%


33.8


%


33.2


%




Prepared foods


 


18.8


%


19.1


%


19.3


%




Other perishables


 


47.7


%


47.1


%


47.5


%




Total sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
Natural
foods can be defined as foods that are minimally processed, largely or
completely free of artificial ingredients, preservatives and other
non-naturally occurring chemicals and as near to their whole, natural state as
possible. Organic foods are grown through methods intended to support and
enhance the earth’s natural balance. Under the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s
(“USDA”) Organic Rule, implemented into Federal law in 2002, all products
labeled as “organic” in any form must be certified by a USDA-accredited
certifying agency. Furthermore, all retailers, including Whole Foods Market,
that handle, store, and sell organic products must implement measures to
protect their organic integrity. Generally, organic food products are produced
using:
 
·                  agricultural management practices intended to
promote and enhance ecosystem health;
·                  no genetically engineered seeds or crops,
sewage sludge, long-lasting pesticides, herbicides or fungicides;
·                  livestock management practices intended to
promote healthy, humanely treated animals by providing organically grown feed,
fresh air and outdoor access while using no antibiotics or growth hormones; and
·                  food processing practices intended to protect
the integrity of the organic product and disallow irradiation, genetically
modified organisms (“GMOs”) or synthetic preservatives.
 
Our Quality Standards
 
We
aspire to become an international brand synonymous with not just natural and
organic foods, but also with being the highest quality food retailer in every
community in which we are located. We believe our strict quality standards
differentiate our stores from other supermarkets and enable us to attract and
maintain a broad base of loyal customers.
 
·                  We carefully evaluate each and every product
we sell.
·                  We feature foods that are free of artificial
preservatives, colors, flavors, sweeteners and hydrogenated fats.
·                  We are passionate about great tasting food
and the pleasure of sharing it with others.
·                  We are committed to foods that are fresh,
wholesome and safe to eat.
·                  We seek out and promote organically grown
foods.
·                  We provide food and nutritional products that
support health and well-being.
 
Store Brands
 
Our
store brands currently feature approximately 2,200 SKUs led by our primary
brands, 365 Everyday Value and 365 Organic. While some of our store brands
yield greater margins than their national brand alternative, their primary
purpose is to help differentiate our product selection and provide more value
offerings to our customers. In addition to our nationally driven programs, we
have a number of store-made and regionally made fresh items sold under the
Whole Foods Market label; we offer specialty and organic coffee, tea and
drinking chocolates through our Allegro Coffee Company subsidiary, and we 
 
4





Table of Contents
 
have
developed a grouping of “exclusive” and “control brand” products to fill out
our family of brands. Total sales of store-branded products across all
categories were approximately 11% of our retail sales in both fiscal years 2010
and 2009.
 
Whole TradeTM Guarantee
 
Whole
Trade Guarantee products meet our high quality standards; provide more money to
producers; ensure better wages and working conditions for workers; and utilize
sound environmental practices. Our Whole Trade Guarantee program currently
includes over 1,400 items, with sales of approximately $114.3 million in fiscal
year 2010. Whole Foods Market donates 1% of sales of exclusive Whole Trade
Guarantee products to the Whole Planet Foundation® to help alleviate world poverty.
 
Locally Grown
 
We
are committed to buying from local producers whose products meet our high
quality standards, particularly those who are dedicated to environmentally
friendly, sustainable agriculture. Whole Foods Market currently purchases
produce from over 2,000 different farms through various suppliers. In 2007, we
established a budget of up to $10 million to promote local food production, and
as of September 26, 2010, we had disbursed more than $3.7 million in loans
to 66 local producers Company-wide.
 
Animal Compassionate
 
We
are dedicated to promoting animal welfare on farms and ranches that raise
animals for meat production, helping to create alternatives to the “factory
farm” methods of raising livestock. We have encouraged innovative animal
production practices to improve the quality and safety of the meat and poultry
sold in our stores while also supporting humane living conditions for the
animals. Work on our “animal compassionate” standards started in 2003, and
additional standards development and implementation of a 5-Step Animal Welfare
Rating system transitioned to the Global Animal Partnership foundation in 2008.
Global Animal Partnership’s 5-Step Animal Welfare Rating standards have been
developed for beef cattle, pigs and broiler chickens and are in the works for
other species as well. By February 2011, our meat departments in all
stores will reflect these certifications.
 
Sustainable Seafood
 
In
September 2010, we completed the launch of a color-coded, science-based
seafood sustainability ratings program developed by partnering organizations,
Blue Ocean Institute and Monterey Bay Aquarium. The new program rates non-MSC
certified wild-caught seafood based on key criteria for sustainable fisheries
with solid, transparent ranking methods. The ratings provide customers with the
information they need to make informed decisions about their seafood purchases,
and with our promise to phase out all “red-rated” species by Earth Day 2013, we
have deepened our commitment to having fully sustainable seafood departments.
This new seafood ratings program builds upon our ongoing partnership with the
Marine Stewardship Council (“MSC”) and complements Whole Foods Market’s
existing farmed seafood standards, which remain the highest in the industry.
Farmed seafood at Whole Foods Market carries the “Responsibly Farmed” logo to
indicate that it meets these high standards.
 
Seasonality
 
The
Company’s average weekly sales are typically highest in the second and third
fiscal quarters and lowest in the fourth fiscal quarter. Gross profit is
typically lower in the first fiscal quarter due to the product mix of holiday
sales, and in the fourth fiscal quarter due to the seasonally slower sales
period during the summer months.
 
Growth Strategy
 
We
are a Fortune 500 company, ranking number 284 on the 2010 list. Our sales have
grown rapidly due to historically high identical store sales growth,
acquisitions, and new store openings from approximately $92.5 million in fiscal
year 1991, excluding the effect of pooling-of-interests transactions completed
since 1991, to approximately $9.01 billion in fiscal year 2010, a compounded
annual growth rate of approximately 27%.
 
Over
the last 10 years, our identical store sales growth has averaged approximately
7%. Approximately 21% of our existing square footage was acquired, and while we
may continue to pursue acquisitions of smaller chains that provide access to
desirable areas and experienced team members, such acquisitions are not
expected to significantly impact our future store growth or financial results.
Our growth strategy is to expand primarily through new store openings. We have
a disciplined, opportunistic real estate strategy, opening stores in existing
trade areas as well as new areas, including international locations. Our new
stores typically are located on premium real estate sites and range in size
between 35,000 and 50,000 square feet which we believe is appropriate in most
circumstances to maximize return on invested capital and Economic Value Added (“EVA®”). We expect the majority
of our stores to fall within this range going forward. In its simplest
definition, EVA is equivalent to net operating profits after taxes minus a
charge on the cost of invested capital necessary to generate those profits.
 
5





Table of
Contents
 
Our
historical store growth and sales mix is summarized below:
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Stores at beginning of fiscal year


 


284


 


275


 


276


 


186


 


175


 




Stores opened


 


16


 


15


 


20


 


21


 


13


 




Acquired stores


 


2


 


—


 


—


 


109


 


1


 




Divested stores


 


(2


)


—


 


—


 


(35


)


—


 




Relocated stores


 


—


 


(5


)


(7


)


(5


)


(2


)




Closed stores


 


(1


)


(1


)


(14


)


—


 


(1


)




Stores at end of fiscal year


 


299


 


284


 


275


 


276


 


186


 




Remodels with major expansions(1)


 


—


 


2


 


1


 


2


 


1


 




Total gross square footage at end of fiscal year


 


11,231,000


 


10,566,000


 


9,895,000


 


9,312,000


 


6,377,000


 




Year-over-year growth


 


6


%


7


%


6


%


46


%


10


%




Sales mix:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Identical stores


 


93.2


%


91.4


%


80.9


%


88.8


%


90.4


%




New/relocated stores and remodels with major
  expansions


 


6.0


%


7.8


%


9.9


%


8.4


%


8.8


%




Acquired stores


 


0.1


%


0.0


%


8.7


%


1.3


%


0.1


%




Other sales, primarily non-retail external sales


 


0.7


%


0.8


%


0.5


%


1.5


%


0.7


%




Total sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
(1) Defined as remodels with
expansions of square footage greater than 20% completed during the fiscal year.
 
We remain focused on the right sized store for each market. In response
to overall economic conditions, we trimmed approximately 1.4 million square
feet from our development pipeline. Over the last two and a half years, we
downsized 20 leases for stores in development by an average of 13,000 square
feet each, and we terminated 22 leases averaging 52,000 square feet per store.
We are now focused on rebuilding the pipeline given the improvement in the
economy, our strong new store performance, and the favorable rent opportunities
we are seeing. We anticipate an accelerated pace of lease signings in the
future to translate into a higher number of store openings starting in fiscal
year 2012. Our historical store development pipeline is summarized below:
 



 


 


November 3,


 


November 4,


 


November 5,


 


November 20,


 


November 2,


 




 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Stores in development


 


52


 


53


 


66


 


87


 


88


 




Average size (gross square feet)


 


39,000


 


45,000


 


49,000


 


51,000


 


56,000


 




Total gross square footage in development


 


2,052,000


 


2,410,000


 


3,294,000


 


4,485,000


 


5,003,000


 



 
Store Description
 
Each
of our stores is designed to fit the size and configuration of the particular
location and to reflect the community in which it is located. We strive to
transform food shopping from a chore into a dynamic experience by building and
operating stores with colorful décor, well-trained team members, an exciting
product mix that emphasizes healthy eating and our high quality standards,
ever-changing selections, samples, open kitchens, scratch bakeries,
hand-stacked produce, and prepared foods stations. We also incorporate many
environmentally sustainable aspects into our store design. Our stores typically
include sit-down eating areas, customer comment boards and customer service
booths. In addition, some stores offer special services such as massage, valet
parking, personal shopping and home delivery. We believe our stores play a
unique role as a third place, besides the home and office, where people can
gather, interact and learn while at the same time discovering the many joys of
eating and sharing food.
 
Most
of our stores are located in high-traffic shopping areas on premier real estate
sites and are either freestanding or in strip centers. We also have a number of
urban stores located in high-density, mixed-use developments. In selecting
store locations, we use an internally developed model to analyze potential
sites based on various criteria such as education levels, population density
and income levels within certain drive times. After we have selected a target
site, our development group does a comprehensive site study and sales
projection. Each project must meet an internal EVA hurdle return based on a 9%
weighted average cost of capital, which for new stores generally is expected to
be cumulative positive EVA in five years or less.
 
The
required cash investment for new stores varies depending on the size of the
store, geographic location, degree of work performed by the landlord and
complexity of site development issues. To a significant degree, it also depends
on how the project is structured, including costs for elements that often
increase or decrease rent, e.g., lease acquisition costs, shell and/or garage
costs, and landlord allowances. For stores opened during fiscal year 2010, the
average size was 42,600 square feet, and the average new store investment was
approximately $11.1 million, or $261 per square foot. This excludes new store
inventory of approximately $0.9 million and pre-opening and relocation
expenses, which averaged approximately $2.6 million per store. In comparison,
our stores opened during fiscal year 2009, including six relocations, averaged
53,500 square feet in 
 
6





Table of
Contents
 
size,
and the average new store investment was approximately $16.9 million, or $316
per square foot; new store inventory averaged $1.1 million, and pre-opening and
relocation expenses averaged approximately $3.0 million.
 
Purchasing and Distribution
 
The
majority of our purchasing, particularly in dry grocery, occurs at the regional
and national levels, enabling us to negotiate better volume discounts with
major vendors and distributors while allowing our store buyers to focus on
local products and the unique product mix necessary to keep the neighborhood
market feel in our stores. We are increasingly focusing more of our purchasing
on producer-direct and manufacturer-direct programs, and we remain committed to
buying from local producers that meet our high quality standards.
 
We
own two produce procurement centers which facilitate the procurement and
distribution of the majority of the produce we sell. We also operate four
seafood-processing and distribution facilities, a specialty coffee and tea
procurement and brewing operation, and 10 regional distribution centers that
focus primarily on perishables distribution to our stores across the U.S.,
Canada and the United Kingdom. In addition, we have five regional commissary
kitchens and six bakehouse facilities, all of which distribute products to our
stores. Other products are typically procured through a combination of
specialty wholesalers and direct distributors.
 
United
Natural Foods, Inc. (“UNFI”) is our single largest third-party supplier,
accounting for approximately 27% of our total purchases in fiscal year 2010. In
June 2010, we extended our long-term relationship with UNFI as our primary
supplier of dry grocery and frozen food products through 2020. A separate
agreement signed in July 2010 made UNFI our primary non-perishables
distributor in an additional two regions, beginning in fiscal year 2011,
allowing us to focus our internal distribution efforts in our regions around
key perishable departments.
 
Store Operations
 
We
strive to promote a strong Company culture featuring a team approach to store
operations that we believe is distinctly more empowering of team members than
that of the traditional supermarket. Our domestic Whole Foods Market stores
each employ between 45 and 650 team members who comprise up to 13 self-managed
teams per store, each led by a team leader. Each team within a store is
responsible for a different product offering or aspect of store operations such
as prepared foods, grocery, or customer service, among others. We also promote
a decentralized approach to store operations in which many decisions are made by
teams at the individual store level. In this structure, an effective store team
leader is critical to the success of the store. The store team leader works
closely with one or more assistant store team leaders, as well as with all of
the department team leaders, to operate the store as efficiently and profitably
as possible.
 
Team
members are involved at all levels of our business. We strive to create a
Company-wide consciousness of “shared fate” by uniting the interests of team
members as closely as possible with those of our shareholders. One way we
reinforce this concept is through our Gainsharing program. Under Gainsharing,
as part of our annual planning process, each store and team receives a labor
budget expressed as a percentage of sales, with leverage built into the budgets
on an overall Company basis. When teams come in under budget due either to
higher sales or lower labor costs, a portion of the surplus is divided among
the team members to boost their hourly pay and a portion is set aside in a savings
pool. When teams are over budget (or in a labor deficit position), no
Gainsharing money is paid out. Instead, the overage is taken out of the team’s
savings pool or, in the absence of savings, paid back using future surpluses.
Rewarding our team members for increases in labor productivity, something they
can control, gives them a direct stake in the success of our business. We also
encourage stock ownership among team members through our broad-based team
member stock option plan, stock purchase plan and 401(k) plan.
 
Team Members
 
As
of September 26, 2010, we had approximately 58,300 team members, including
approximately 45,300 full-time, 10,700 part-time and 2,300 temporary team
members. Full-time team members accounted for approximately 81% of all permanent
positions at the end of fiscal year 2010 compared to 85% at the end of fiscal
year 2009. Voluntary turnover of full-time team members improved to 9% in
fiscal year 2010 from 12% in fiscal year 2009, which we believe is very low for
the food retailing industry and allows us to better serve our customers. All of
our team members are non-union, and we consider our team member relations to be
very good.
 
We
believe in empowering our team members to make Whole Foods Market not only a
great place to shop but a great place to build a career. Our salary and
benefits programs reflect our philosophy of egalitarianism. To ensure they are
perceived as fundamentally fair to all stakeholders, our books are open to our
team members, including our annual individual compensation report. We also have
a salary cap that limits the total cash compensation paid to any team member in
a calendar year to 19 times the average annual wage of all team members. In
addition, our co-founder and co-chief executive officer, John Mackey, has
voluntarily set his annual salary at $1 and receives no cash bonuses or stock
option awards.
 
7





Table of
Contents
 
All
of our full-time and part-time team members are eligible to receive stock
options through annual leadership grants or through service-hour grants once
they have accumulated 6,000 service hours (approximately three years of
employment). Approximately 92% of the equity awards granted under the Company’s
stock plan since its inception in 1992 have been granted to team members who
are not executive officers.
 
Team
members are encouraged to take an active role in choosing the benefits made
available by the Company by participating in a Company-wide benefits vote every
three years. Under the current plan voted on by team members, Whole Foods
Market provides health care at no cost to full-time team members who work 30 or
more hours per week and have worked a minimum of 10,000 service hours. In
addition, the Company provides Personal Wellness Accounts (“PWA”) of up to
$1,800 per year to help cover the cost of deductibles and other allowable
out-of-pocket health care expenses not covered by insurance.
 
For
the past 13 years, our team members have helped Whole Foods Market become one
of FORTUNE magazine’s “100 Best
Companies to Work for in America.” Ranking 18th overall and sixth among large
companies in 2010, we are one of only 13 companies to make the “100 Best” list
every year since its inception.
 
Competition
 
Food
retailing is a large, intensely competitive industry. Our competition varies
across the Company and includes but is not limited to local, regional, national
and international conventional and specialty supermarkets, natural foods
stores, warehouse membership clubs, smaller specialty stores, farmers’ markets,
and restaurants, each of which competes with us on the basis of store ambiance
and experience, product selection, quality, customer service, price or a combination
of these factors. Our commitment to natural and organic products, high quality
standards, emphasis on perishable product sales, and empowered team members who
focus on unparalleled customer service differentiate us from the competition
and have created a loyal core customer base. We believe our passionate support
of causes and leadership in areas important to our customers reinforce our
position as the authentic retailer of natural and organic foods, making us the
preferred choice for customers aspiring to a healthier lifestyle.
 
Marketing
 
We
spend much less on advertising and marketing than other supermarkets —
approximately 0.4% of our total sales in fiscal year 2010. Instead, we rely on
word-of-mouth recommendations and testimonials from our shoppers, and we
allocate our marketing budgets among national and regional programs and our
individual stores. We also connect and engage with our customers through social
media websites, in addition to e-newsletters and our own corporate website and
blog at www.wholefoodsmarket.com. Our stores spend most of their marketing
budgets on in-store marketing-related activities, including promotional signage
and events such as local farmers’ markets, taste fairs, classes, tours and
product samplings. We also dedicate resources to The Whole Deal
in-store value guide. Our marketing support mirrors our business model, as
well as our commitment to the community and environment. Each store retains a
separate budget for making contributions to a variety of philanthropic and community
activities, fostering goodwill and developing a high profile with the
community. Contributions (including in-kind contributions of food) to
not-for-profit organizations amount to at least 5% of our after-tax profits
annually.
 
Social Media
 
Social
media provides us with a powerful way to communicate and interact with our
customers, giving us insight at both a local and global level as to how we are
viewed and what our customers want and expect from us. Currently, we have over
387,000 fans on Facebook and over 1.8 million followers on Twitter. In
addition, many of our stores have set up their own Facebook and Twitter
accounts.
 
The Whole Deal
 
We
launched our national “The Whole Deal” campaign in fiscal year 2008 to
emphasize the value of our product offerings. The program includes The Whole Deal value guide available in
all of our U.S. stores, which contains coupons, budget-conscious recipes,
money-saving tips and more; in-store Value Tours led by our “Value Gurus” to
help shoppers find the best deals in every department; and Sure Deal specials,
which highlight everyday pricing on high-quality products our customers want,
not discounts on overstocked or discontinued items. In fiscal year 2010, the
average basket containing a coupon from The
Whole Deal value guide was $66 and contained 20 items compared to
our overall average basket in identical stores which was $34 and contained
eight items.
 
Corporate Responsibility
 
We
seek to be a deeply responsible company in the communities where we do business
around the world, providing ethically-sourced, high-quality products and
transparent information to our customers, reducing our impact on the
environment, and actively participating in our local communities. We believe
that many customers are concerned about health and nutrition, food safety, fair
trade and the environment and choose to shop our stores for these reasons. “Farm-to-fork”
traceability allows them to make more informed purchasing decisions and “vote”
with their dollars.
 
8





Table of
Contents
 
Healthy Eating Education
 
We
are providing a revolutionary educational program in our stores to encourage
healthier lifestyles. Our new Health Starts
HereTM program consists of a simple approach to
eating, paired with practical tools and valuable resources, rooted in our four
principles:
 
·                  Whole FoodTM: Opt for whole, fresh, natural, organic, local and
seasonal foods that are not refined or highly processed.
·                  PLANT-STRONGTM: Simply put, eat mostly plants. Eat more
vegetables, fruits, legumes and beans, nuts, seeds and whole grains.
·                  Healthy Fat: Get your fats from plant
sources, such as nuts and avocados. Alternatively, if eating a diet that
includes animal products, choose leaner meats and seafood.
·                  Nutrient Dense: Choose foods that are rich in
nutrients when compared to their total caloric content, building menus that
ensure highly nutrient-dense meals.
 
The
program includes, among other things: in-store healthy eating centers to
display books and answer questions about healthy eating and cooking ideas;
store tours focused on making healthy eating choices; and a wide variety of
educational opportunities for team members, along with healthy eating classes
and networking opportunities for our customers. We believe our “Health Starts
Here” initiative will grow and evolve over time to become a key competitive
advantage for us, and by offering an informed
approach to food as a source for improved health and vitality, we will help
change many more lives for the better.
 
Whole Planet Foundation®
 
Created
in 2005, the Whole Planet Foundation is an independent, non-profit organization
whose mission is to empower the poor through microcredit, with a focus on the
developing-world communities that supply our stores with product. Microcredit
is a system pioneered by Professor Muhammad Yunus, founder of the Grameen Bank
in Bangladesh and co-recipient of the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize. The philosophy
behind microcredit is to provide the poor access to credit without requiring
contracts or collateral, enabling them to lift themselves out of poverty by
creating or expanding home-based businesses. Whole Foods Market covers all
operating costs and the overhead budget for Whole Planet Foundation, funded in
part by the sale of products under the Company’s Whole Trade Guarantee program
as well as support from customers, vendors, and team members. As of September 26,
2010, the Whole Planet Foundation has partnered with various microfinance
institutions to support over $12.4 million in grants in 20 countries where the
Company sources products. Over 95,000 people (91% women) have received loans
which are being used for home-based businesses including poultry and pig farming,
agriculture, furniture making, tailoring, and selling handicrafts, homemade and
bakery-made foods, clothing and footwear. It is estimated that each woman
supports a family of five, which means our support is indirectly contributing
to the prosperity of approximately 477,000 individuals.
 
Green Mission®
 
We
are committed to supporting wise environmental practices and being a leader in
environmental stewardship. Over the years, we have purchased over 2.8 billion
megawatt hours of wind-based renewable energy, earning six Environmental
Protection Agency (“EPA”) Green Power awards from 2005 through 2010. We have 14
stores and one distribution center using or hosting rooftop solar systems,
three stores with fuel cells, and a commissary kitchen that soon will be using
biofuel from internally-generated waste cooking oil. We have made a commitment
to reduce energy consumption at all of our stores by 25% per square foot by
2015, and we build our new stores with the environment in mind, using green
building innovations whenever possible. Eleven of our stores have received
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (“LEED”) certification by the
U.S. Green Building Council, and two stores have earned Green Globes from the
Green Building Initiative.
 
We
discontinued the use of disposable plastic grocery bags at the checkouts in all
stores in 2008 and pay at least a nickel per reusable bag refund at the
checkout. We also were the first national retailer to provide Forest
Stewardship Council (“FSC”) certified paper bags originating from post-consumer
recycled fiber. Nearly all of our stores are involved in a recycling program,
and most participate in a composting program where food waste and compostable
paper goods are regenerated into compost. Additionally, in 2007 we introduced
fiber packaging in many of our prepared foods departments that is a compostable
alternative to traditional petroleum and wood- or tree-based materials. We also
are working to eliminate the use of Styrofoam in packing materials shipped to
our Company and in product packaging in our stores.
 
9





Table of
Contents
 
Government and Public Affairs
 
Our
stores are subject to various local, state, federal and international laws,
regulations and administrative practices affecting our business. We must comply
with provisions regulating health and sanitation standards, food labeling,
equal employment, minimum wages, licensing for the sale of food, and in many
stores, licensing for beer and wine or other alcoholic beverages.
 
The
manufacturing, processing, formulating, packaging, labeling and advertising of
products are subject to regulation by various federal agencies including the
Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), the Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), the
Consumer Product Safety Commission (“CPSC”), the USDA and the EPA. The
composition and labeling of nutritional supplements are most actively regulated
by the FDA under the provisions of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (“FFDC
Act”). The FFDC Act has been revised in recent years with respect to dietary
supplements by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act and by the Dietary
Supplement Health and Education Act. We believe we are in compliance with all
product labeling requirements material to the Company.
 
Trademarks
 
Trademarks
owned by the Company or its subsidiaries include, but are not limited to: “Whole
Foods Market,” “365 Everyday Value,” “365 Organic Everyday Value,” “AFA,” “Allegro
Coffee Company,” “America’s Healthiest Grocery Store,” “Capers Community
Market,” “Bread & Circus,” “Fresh & Wild,” “Fresh Fields,” “Green
Mission,” “Harry’s Farmers Market,” “Health Starts Here,” “Ideal Market,” “Merchant
of Vino,” “Mrs. Gooch’s,” “Vine Buys,” “Wellspring,” “Whole Baby,” “The
Whole Deal,” “Whole Foods, Whole People, Whole Planet,” “Whole Kids,” “Whole
Kids Organic,” and “Whole Trade.” The Company or its subsidiaries also holds
registrations or applications, and maintains common law trademark rights for
stylized logos and brand names for products created by Allegro Coffee Company
and many of its branded products. In addition, the Company licenses certain
trademarks, including “PLANT-STRONG,” a trademark owned by Engine 2 for Life, LLC.
 
Available Information
 
Our
corporate website at www.wholefoodsmarket.com averages over 80,000 visitors
each day and provides detailed information about our Company, history, product
offerings, and store locations, with hundreds of recipes and a library of
information about environmental, legislative, health, food safety and product
quality issues. In addition, access to the Company’s corporate governance
policies and SEC filings, including annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q, interactive data, current reports on Form 8-K, Section 16
filings, and all amendments to those reports, are available through our website
free of charge. As with our stores, the focus of our website is customer
service. We believe our website provides us with an opportunity to further our
relationships with customers, suppliers and investors; educate them on a
variety of issues; and improve our service levels.
 
We
have included our website and blog addresses only as an inactive textual
reference. The information contained on our website is not incorporated by
reference into this Report on Form 10-K.
 
Item 1A.   Risk Factors.
 
We
wish to caution you that there are risks and uncertainties that could cause our
actual results to be materially different from those indicated by
forward-looking statements that we make from time to time in filings with the
SEC, news releases, reports, proxy statements, registration statements and
other written communications, as well as oral forward-looking statements made
from time to time by representatives of the Company. These risks and
uncertainties include the risk factors described below. The cautionary
statements below discuss important factors that could cause our business,
financial condition, operating results and cash flows to be materially
adversely affected. The Company does not undertake any obligation to update
forward-looking statements.
 
Economic Conditions
 
The
global economic crisis adversely impacted our business and financial results in
fiscal year 2009. Our results of operations may be materially impacted by
changes in overall economic conditions that impact consumer confidence and
spending, including discretionary spending. There can be no assurance that
various governmental activities to stabilize the markets and stimulate the
economy will restore consumer confidence or change spending habits. Future
economic conditions affecting disposable consumer income such as employment
levels, business conditions, changes in housing market conditions, the
availability of credit, interest rates, tax rates, fuel and energy costs, the
impact of natural disasters or acts of terrorism, and other matters could
reduce consumer spending or cause consumers to shift their spending to
lower-priced competitors.
 
Future Growth
 
Our
continued growth depends on our ability to increase sales in our identical
stores and our ability to open new stores. Our results of operations may be
materially impacted by fluctuations in our identical store sales. Our identical
store sales growth could be lower than our historical average for many reasons
including the impact of new and acquired stores entering into the 
 
10





Table of
Contents
 
identical
store base, the opening of new stores that cannibalize store sales in existing
areas, general economic conditions, increased competition, price changes in
response to competitive factors, possible supply shortages, and cycling against
any year of above-average sales results.
 
Our
growth strategy includes opening new stores in existing and new areas and
operating those stores successfully. Successful implementation of this strategy
is dependent on finding suitable locations, and we face competition from other
retailers for such sites. There can be no assurance that we will continue to
grow through new store openings. We may not be able to timely open new stores
or operate them successfully. Also, we may not be able to successfully hire and
train new team members or integrate those team members into the programs and
policies of the Company. We may not be able to adapt our distribution,
management information and other operating systems to adequately supply
products to new stores at competitive prices so that we can operate the stores
in a successful and profitable manner.
 
Competitive Environment
 
Our
competitors include but are not limited to local, regional, national and
international supermarkets, natural food stores, warehouse membership clubs, small
specialty stores and restaurants. Their businesses compete with us for
products, customers and locations. In addition, some are expanding more
aggressively in marketing a range of natural and organic foods. Some of these
potential competitors may have been in business longer or may have greater
financial or marketing resources than we do and may be able to devote greater
resources to sourcing, promoting and selling their products. As competition in
certain areas intensifies, our results of operations may be negatively impacted
through a loss of sales, reduction in margin from competitive price changes,
and/or greater operating costs such as marketing.
 
Fluctuations in Quarterly Operating Results
 
Our
quarterly operating results could fluctuate for many reasons, including losses
from new stores, variations in the mix of product sales, price changes in
response to competitive factors and a potential lack of customer acceptance,
foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, increases in store operating costs,
including commodity costs, that are either wholly or partially beyond our
control, possible supply shortages, general economic conditions, health care
costs, legal costs, insurance costs, extreme weather-related disruptions,
including hurricanes and earthquakes, and potential uninsured casualty losses
or other losses. In addition, our quarterly operating results and
quarter-to-quarter comparisons have been and may be impacted by the timing of
new store openings, construction and pre-opening expenses, the timing of
acquisitions, store closures and relocations, seasonality, and the range of
operating results generated from newly opened stores. Quarter-to-quarter
comparisons of results of operations have been and may be materially impacted
by the timing of new store openings.
 
Stock Price Volatility
 
In
fiscal year 2010, the closing market price per share of our common stock ranged
from $25.30 to $42.50. The market price of our common stock could be subject to
significant fluctuation in response to various market factors and events. These
market factors and events include variations in our sales and earnings results
and any failure to meet market expectations; changes in ratings and earnings
estimates by securities analysts; publicity regarding us, our competitors, or
the natural products industry generally; new statutes or regulations or changes
in the interpretation of existing statutes or regulations affecting the natural
products industry specifically; and sales of substantial amounts of common
stock in the public market or the perception that such sales could occur and
other factors. In addition, the stock market in recent years has experienced
broad price and volume fluctuations that often have been unrelated to the
operating performance of particular companies. These market fluctuations also
may adversely affect the market price of our common stock. Our cash flow from
the exercise of team member stock options may be adversely affected in the
future by fluctuations in the market price of our common stock.
 
Self-Insurance Plans
 
The
Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for
the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability,
property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability
and team member health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the risks
that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering
historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other
actuarial assumptions. Our results could be materially impacted by claims and
other expenses related to such plans if future occurrences and claims differ
from these assumptions and historical trends.
 
Product Liability
 
There
is increasing governmental scrutiny of and public awareness regarding food
safety. We believe that many customers choose to shop our stores because of
their interest in health, nutrition and food safety. We believe that our
customers hold us to a higher food safety standard than other supermarkets. The
real or perceived sale of contaminated food products by us could result in
government enforcement action, private litigation, product recalls and other
liabilities, the settlement or outcome of which might have a material adverse
effect on our sales and operations.
 
11





Table of
Contents
 
Brand Value
 
We
believe our Company has built an excellent reputation as a food retailer,
socially-responsible corporation and employer. We believe our continued success
depends on our ability to preserve, grow and leverage the value of our brand.
Brand value is based in large part on perceptions of subjective qualities, and
even isolated incidents can erode trust and confidence, particularly if they
result in adverse publicity, governmental investigations or litigation, which
can have an adverse impact on these perceptions and lead to adverse affects on
our business or team members.
 
Natural and Organic Products Availability
 
There
is no assurance that quality natural and organic products will be available to
meet our future needs. If other supermarkets significantly increase their
natural and organic product offerings or if new laws require the reformulation
of certain products to meet tougher standards, the supply of these products may
be constrained. To a certain degree, we are also dependent on our largest
supplier, United Natural Foods, Inc. (“UNFI”), which accounted for
approximately 27% of our total purchases in fiscal year 2010. Any significant
disruption in the supply of quality natural and organic products could have a
material impact on our overall sales and cost of goods sold.
 
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
 
Our
total assets included long-lived assets totaling approximately $1.96 billion at
September 26, 2010. Long-lived assets are evaluated for impairment
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount
of an asset may not be recoverable. Our impairment evaluations require use of
financial estimates of future cash flows. Application of alternative
assumptions could produce significantly different results. We may be required
to recognize impairments of long-lived assets based on future economic factors
such as unfavorable changes in estimated future undiscounted cash flows of an
asset group. Long-lived asset impairments could result in material charges that
would adversely affect our results of operations and capitalization.
 
Lease Obligations
 
The
majority of our stores, distribution centers, bakehouses and administrative
facilities are leased, with expiration dates ranging from 1 to 35 years. We are
subject to risks associated with our current and future real estate leases. Our
costs could increase because of changes in the real estate markets and supply
or demand for real estate sites. We generally cannot cancel our leases, so if
we decide to close a location, we may nonetheless be committed to perform our
obligations under the applicable lease including paying the base rent for the
remaining lease term. As each lease expires, we may fail to negotiate
renewals, either on commercially acceptable terms or any terms at all. As of September 26,
2010, we had 25 leased properties that are not being utilized in current
operations, with expiration dates ranging from 5 months to 19 years. The 25
leased properties represent acquired dormant locations, stores closed
post-acquisition, and stores closed due to relocation.
 
Perishable Products
 
We believe our stores more heavily emphasize perishable products than
other supermarket stores. Perishable products accounted for approximately 66.5%
of total sales at Whole Foods Market locations in fiscal year 2010. The Company’s
emphasis on perishable products may result in significant product inventory
losses in the event of extended power outages, natural disasters or other
catastrophic occurrences.
 
Legal Matters
 
From
time to time, we are party to legal proceedings, including matters involving
personnel and employment issues, personal injury, intellectual property,
acquisitions, and other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business.
Our results could be materially impacted by the decisions and expenses related
to pending or future proceedings.
 
Accounting Standards and Estimates
 
Generally
accepted accounting principles and related accounting pronouncements,
implementation guidelines, and interpretations for many aspects of our
business, such as accounting for insurance and self-insurance, inventories,
goodwill and intangible assets, derivatives, store closures, leases, income
taxes and share-based payments, are highly complex and involve subjective
judgments. Changes in these rules or their interpretation or changes in
underlying estimates, assumptions or judgments by our management could
significantly change or add significant volatility to our reported earnings
without a comparable underlying change in cash flow from operations.
 
Loss of Key Management
 
We
are dependent upon a number of key management and other team members. If we
were to lose the services of a significant number of key team members within a
short period of time, this could have a material adverse effect on our
operations. We do not maintain key person insurance on any team member. Our
continued success also is dependent upon our ability to attract and retain
qualified team members to meet our future growth needs. We face intense
competition for qualified team members, many of whom are subject to offers from
competing employers. We may not be able to attract and retain necessary team
members to operate our business.
 
12

 
 




Table of
Contents
 
Supplier Concentration Risk
 
UNFI
is our single largest third-party supplier, accounting for approximately 27% of
our total purchases in fiscal year 2010. During fiscal year 2010, we extended
our long-term relationship with UNFI as our primary supplier of dry grocery and
frozen food products through 2020 and added two of our regions to our
distribution arrangement beginning in fiscal year 2011. Due to this concentration
of purchases from a single third-party supplier, the cancellation of our
distribution arrangement or the disruption, delay or inability of UNFI to
deliver product to our stores may materially and adversely affect our business,
financial condition or results of operations while we establish alternative
distribution channels.
 
Widespread Health Epidemic
 
The
Company’s business could be severely impacted by a widespread regional,
national or global health epidemic. Our stores are a place where customers come
together, interact and learn while at the same time discovering the many joys
of eating and sharing food. A widespread health epidemic may cause customers to
avoid public gathering places or otherwise change their shopping behaviors.
Additionally, a widespread health epidemic could also adversely impact our
business by disrupting production and delivery of products to our stores and by
impacting our ability to appropriately staff our stores.
 
Indebtedness
 
As
of November 19, 2010, we had $390 million remaining on our term loan
maturing August 28, 2012 and we may incur additional debt in the future. A
significant portion of our future cash flow from operating activities may be
dedicated to the repayment on our indebtedness. Our indebtedness could limit
our ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital
expenditures, debt service requirements, acquisitions or other purposes in the
future. There is no guarantee that we will be able to meet our debt service
obligations. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow to meet our debt
service obligations, we may be required to seek additional financing in the
debt or equity markets, refinance or restructure all or a portion of our
indebtedness, sell selected assets or reduce or delay planned capital or
operating expenditures. If we fail to comply with our debt covenants, we will
be in default, in which case there can be no assurance that we would be able to
cure the default, receive waivers from our lenders, amend the loan agreements or
refinance the debt.
 
Labor Relations
 
All
of our team members are non-union, and we consider our team member relations to
be very good. From time to time, however, unions have attempted to organize all
or part of our team member base at certain stores and non-retail facilities.
Responding to such organization attempts is distracting to management and team
members and may have a negative financial impact on a store, facility or the
Company as a whole.
 
Governmental Regulation
 
The
Company is subject to various international, federal, state and local laws,
regulations and administrative practices affecting our business, and we must
comply with provisions regulating health and sanitation standards, food
labeling, equal employment, minimum wages, and licensing for the sale of food
and, in some stores, alcoholic beverages. Our new store openings could be
delayed or prevented or our existing stores could be impacted by difficulties
or failures in our ability to obtain or maintain required approvals or
licenses. Changes in existing laws or implementation of new laws, regulations
and practices (e.g., health care reform and/or card check legislation) could
have a significant impact on our business.
 
The
USDA’s Organic Rule facilitates interstate commerce and the marketing of
organically produced food and provides assurance to our customers that such
products meet consistent, uniform standards. Compliance with this rule could
pose a significant burden on some of our suppliers, which may cause a
disruption in some of our product offerings.
 
We
cannot predict the nature of future laws, regulations, interpretations or
applications, or determine what effect either additional government regulations
or administrative orders, when and if promulgated, or disparate federal, state
and local regulatory schemes would have on our business in the future. They
could, however, require the reformulation of certain products to meet new
standards, the recall or discontinuance of certain products not able to be
reformulated, additional record keeping, expanded documentation of the
properties of certain products, expanded or different labeling and/or
scientific substantiation. Any or all of such requirements could have an
adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
 
International Operations
 
Though
only 3.0% of our total sales in fiscal year 2010, the Company’s international
operations are subject to certain risks of conducting business abroad,
including fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, changes in regulatory
requirements, and changes or uncertainties in the economic, social and
political conditions in the Company’s geographic areas, among other things.
 
13





Table of Contents
 
Intellectual Property
 
We
rely on a combination of trademark, trade secret and copyright law and internal
procedures and nondisclosure agreements to protect our intellectual property.
There can be no assurance that our intellectual property rights can be
successfully asserted in the future or will not be invalidated, circumvented or
challenged. In addition, the laws of certain foreign countries in which our
products may be produced or sold do not protect our intellectual property
rights to the same extent as the laws of the United States. Failure to protect
our proprietary information could have a material adverse effect on our
business, results of operations and financial condition.
 
Income Taxes
 
Our
future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by the earnings mix
being lower than historical results in states or countries where we have
lower statutory rates and higher than historical results in states or
countries where we have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of
our deferred tax assets and liabilities, or by changes in tax laws or
interpretations thereof. In addition, we are subject to periodic audits and
examinations by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other state and local taxing
authorities. The Company has been notified that the IRS will open an audit
covering fiscal years 2008 and 2007. With limited exceptions, the Company is no
longer subject to federal income tax examinations for fiscal years prior to
2007, and to state and local examinations for fiscal years prior to 2001. Our
results could be materially impacted by the determinations and expenses related
to these and other proceedings by the IRS and other state and local taxing
authorities.
 
Information Systems
 
We
rely extensively on information systems for point-of-sale processing in our
stores, supply chain, financial reporting, human resources and various other
processes and transactions. Our information systems are subject to damage or
interruption from power outages, computer and telecommunications failures,
computer viruses, security breaches, including breaches of our transaction
processing or other systems that could result in the compromise of confidential
customer data, catastrophic events, and usage errors by our team members. If
our systems are breached, damaged or cease to function properly, we may have to
make significant investments to fix or replace them, suffer interruptions in
our operations, face costly litigation, and our reputation with our customers
may be harmed. Any material interruption in our information systems may have a
material adverse effect on our business or results of operations.
 
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
The
Company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate
internal control over financial reporting. An internal control system, no
matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable, not
absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. Further,
the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource
constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their
costs. Because of the inherent limitations in all internal control systems,
internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect
misstatements. Any failure to maintain an effective system of internal control
over financial reporting could limit our ability to report our financial
results accurately and timely or to detect and prevent fraud, and could expose
us to litigation or adversely affect the market price of our common stock. The
Company’s management concluded that its internal control over financial
reporting was effective as of September 26, 2010. See “Item 9A. Controls
and Procedures — Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial
Reporting.”
 
Item 1B.   Unresolved Staff Comments.
 
Not
applicable.
 
Item 2.      Properties.
 
As
of September 26, 2010, we operated 299 stores: 288 stores in 38 U.S.
states and the District of Columbia; 6 stores in Canada; and 5 stores in the
United Kingdom. We own 11 stores, two distribution facilities and land for one
store in development, including the adjacent property. We also own a building
on leased land, which is leased to third parties, and have two stores in
development on leased land. All other stores, distribution centers, bakehouses
and administrative facilities are leased, with expiration dates ranging from 1
to 35 years. We have options to renew most of our leases in five-year increments
with renewal periods ranging from 5 to 50 years. In addition, as of September 26,
2010, we had 25 leased properties that are not being utilized in current
operations, of which 19 are related to Wild Oats, with expiration dates ranging
from 5 months to 19 years. We are actively negotiating to sublease or
terminate leases related to these locations.
 
14





Table of Contents
 
The
following table shows the number of our stores by state, the District of
Columbia, Canada and the United Kingdom as of September 26, 2010:
 



 


 


Number


 


 


 


Number


 


 


 


Number


 




Location


 


of stores


 


Location


 


of stores


 


Location


 


of stores


 




Alabama


 


1


 


Kentucky


 


2


 


Ohio


 


6


 




Arizona


 


7


 


Louisiana


 


3


 


Oklahoma


 


1


 




Arkansas


 


1


 


Maine


 


1


 


Oregon


 


7


 




California


 


60


 


Maryland


 


8


 


Pennsylvania


 


8


 




Canada


 


6


 


Massachusetts


 


20


 


Rhode
  Island


 


3


 




Colorado


 


17


 


Michigan


 


5


 


South
  Carolina


 


2


 




Connecticut


 


7


 


Minnesota


 


2


 


Tennessee


 


4


 




District
  of Columbia


 


3


 


Missouri


 


2


 


Texas


 


15


 




Florida


 


16


 


Nebraska


 


1


 


United
  Kingdom


 


5


 




Georgia


 


7


 


Nevada


 


5


 


Utah


 


4


 




Hawaii


 


2


 


New
  Jersey


 


10


 


Virginia


 


9


 




Illinois


 


17


 


New
  Mexico


 


4


 


Washington


 


6


 




Indiana


 


2


 


New
  York


 


10


 


Wisconsin


 


2


 




Kansas


 


2


 


North
  Carolina


 


6


 


 


 


 


 



 
Item 3.      Legal Proceedings.
 
From
time to time we are a party to legal proceedings including matters involving
personnel and employment issues, personal injury, intellectual property and
other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business which have not
resulted in any material losses to date. Although management does not expect
that the outcome in these proceedings will have a material adverse effect on
our financial condition or results of operations, litigation is inherently
unpredictable. Therefore, we could incur judgments or enter into settlements of
claims that could materially impact our results.
 
On
October 27, 2008, Whole Foods Market was served with the complaint in
Kottaras v. Whole Foods Market, Inc., a putative class action filed in the
United States District Court for the District of Columbia, seeking treble
damages, equitable, injunctive, and declaratory relief and alleging that the
acquisition and merger between Whole Foods Market and Wild Oats Markets
violates various provisions of the federal antitrust laws. This case is in the
preliminary stages. Whole Foods Market cannot at this time predict the likely
outcome of this judicial proceeding or estimate the amount or range of loss or
possible loss that may arise from it. The Company has not accrued any loss
related to the outcome of this case as of September 26, 2010.
 
Item 4.      Removed and Reserved.
 
15





Table of Contents
 
PART II
 
Item 5.      Market for Registrant’s Common Equity,
Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
 
Whole
Foods Market’s common stock is traded on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under
the symbol “WFMI.”
 
The
Company was added to Standard & Poor’s S&P 500 index in December 2005.
 
The
following sets forth the intra-day quarterly high and low sale prices of the
Company’s common stock for fiscal years 2010 and 2009:
 



 


 


High


 


Low


 




2010


 


 


 


 


 




September 28, 2009 to January 17, 2010


 


$


34.40


 


$


24.94


 




January 18, 2010 to April 11, 2010


 


38.80


 


26.88


 




April 12, 2010 to July 4, 2010


 


43.18


 


34.52


 




July 5, 2010 to September 26, 2010


 


40.43


 


33.96


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




2009


 


 


 


 


 




September 29, 2008 to January 18, 2009


 


$


22.21


 


$


7.04


 




January 19, 2009 to April 12, 2009


 


19.11


 


9.06


 




April 13, 2009 to July 5, 2009


 


23.71


 


17.08


 




July 6, 2009 to September 27, 2009


 


30.13


 


17.16


 



 
As of November 19, 2010, there were 1,547 holders of record of
Whole Foods Market’s common stock, and the closing stock price was $45.71.
 
Treasury Stock
 
On
November 8, 2009, the Company’s stock repurchase program, with
approximately $200 million in remaining authorization, expired and was not
renewed.
 
Redeemable Preferred Stock
 
On December 2, 2008, the Company issued 425,000 shares of Series A
8% Redeemable, Convertible Exchangeable Participating Preferred Stock, $0.01
par value per share (“Series A Preferred Stock”) to affiliates of Leonard
Green & Partners, L.P., for approximately $413.1 million, net of
approximately $11.9 million in closing and issuance costs. On October 23,
2009, the Company announced its intent to call all 425,000 outstanding shares
of the Series A Preferred Stock for redemption in accordance with the
terms governing such Series A Preferred Stock. Subject to conversion of
the Series A Preferred Stock by its holders, the Company planned to redeem
such Series A Preferred Stock on November 27, 2009 at a price per
share equal to $1,000 plus accrued and unpaid dividends. In accordance with the
terms governing the Series A Preferred Stock, at any time prior to the
redemption date, the Series A Preferred Stock could be converted to common
stock by the holders thereof. On November 26, 2009, the holders of the
Company’s Series A Preferred Stock converted all outstanding shares into
approximately 29.7 million shares of Company common stock. The shares of common
stock were issued using a transaction exempt from registration pursuant to Section 3(a)(9) of
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. During fiscal years 2010 and 2009, the
Company paid cash dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock totaling $8.5
million and approximately $19.8 million, respectively.
 
The following table summarizes information about the Company’s equity
compensation plans by type as of September 26, 2010 (in thousands, except
per share amounts):
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Options


 




 


 


 


 


Weighted


 


available


 




 


 


Options


 


average


 


for future


 




Plan category


 


outstanding


 


exercise price


 


issuance


 




Approved by security holders


 


18,946


 


$


46.00


 


12,677


 




Not approved by security holders


 


—


 


—


 


—


 




Total


 


18,946


 


$


46.00


 


12,677


 



 
16





Table of Contents
 
Item 6.      Selected Financial Data.
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Summary Financial Information
(In
thousands, except per share amounts and operating data)
 
The
following selected financial data are derived from the Company’s consolidated
financial statements and should be read in conjunction with “Item 7. Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Item
8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
 



 


 


Sept. 26,


 


Sept. 27,


 


Sept. 28,


 


Sept. 30,


 


Sept. 24,


 




 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Consolidated Statements of
  Operations Data(1)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Sales


 


$


9,005,794


 


$


8,031,620


 


$


7,953,912


 


$


6,591,773


 


$


5,607,376


 




Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


5,870,393


 


5,277,310


 


5,247,207


 


4,295,170


 


3,647,734


 




Gross profit


 


3,135,401


 


2,754,310


 


2,706,705


 


2,296,603


 


1,959,642


 




Direct store expenses


 


2,375,716


 


2,145,809


 


2,107,940


 


1,711,229


 


1,421,968


 




General and administrative expenses


 


272,449


 


243,749


 


270,428


 


217,743


 


181,244


 




Pre-opening expenses


 


38,044


 


49,218


 


55,554


 


59,319


 


32,058


 




Relocation, store closure and lease termination
  costs


 


11,217


 


31,185


 


36,545


 


10,861


 


5,363


 




Operating income


 


437,975


 


284,349


 


236,238


 


297,451


 


319,009


 




Interest expense


 


(33,048


)


(36,856


)


(36,416


)


(4,208


)


(32


)




Investment and other income


 


6,854


 


3,449


 


6,697


 


11,324


 


20,736


 




Income before income taxes


 


411,781


 


250,942


 


206,519


 


304,567


 


339,713


 




Provision for income taxes


 


165,948


 


104,138


 


91,995


 


121,827


 


135,885


 




Net income


 


245,833


 


146,804


 


114,524


 


182,740


 


203,828


 




Preferred stock dividends


 


5,478


 


28,050


 


—


 


—


 


—


 




Income available to common shareholders


 


$


240,355


 


$


118,754


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 


$


203,828


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings per share


 


$


1.45


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.30


 


$


1.46


 




Weighted average shares outstanding


 


166,244


 


140,414


 


139,886


 


140,088


 


139,328


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Diluted earnings per share


 


$


1.43


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.29


 


$


1.41


 




Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted basis


 


171,710


 


140,414


 


140,011


 


141,836


 


145,082


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dividends declared per common share


 


$


—


 


$


—


 


$


0.60


 


$


0.87


 


$


2.45


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Consolidated Balance Sheets Data


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Net working capital


 


$


413,647


 


$


371,356


 


$


(43,571


)


$


(104,364


)


$


114,211


 




Total assets


 


3,986,540


 


3,783,388


 


3,380,736


 


3,213,128


 


2,042,996


 




Long-term debt (including current maturities)


 


508,698


 


739,237


 


929,170


 


760,868


 


8,655


 




Shareholders’ equity


 


2,373,258


 


1,627,876


 


1,506,024


 


1,458,804


 


1,404,143


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Operating Data


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Number of stores at end of fiscal year


 


299


 


284


 


275


 


276


 


186


 




Average store size (gross square footage)


 


38,000


 


37,000


 


36,000


 


34,000


 


34,000


 




Average weekly sales per store


 


$


588,000


 


$


549,000


 


$


570,000


 


$


617,000


 


$


593,000


 




Comparable store sales increase(2)


 


7.1


%


-3.1


%


4.9


%


7.1


%


11.0


%




Identical store sales increase(2)


 


6.5


%


-4.3


%


3.6


%


5.8


%


10.3


%



 



(1)


Fiscal
  years 2010, 2009, 2008 and 2006 were 52-week years and fiscal year 2007 was a
  53-week year.




(2)


Sales of a store are
  deemed to be comparable commencing in the fifty-third full week after the
  store was opened or acquired. Identical store sales exclude sales from
  relocated stores and remodeled stores with expansions of square footage
  greater than 20% from the comparable calculation. Stores closed for eight or
  more days are excluded from the comparable and identical store base in the
  first fiscal week of closure until re-opened for a full fiscal week.



 
17





Table of Contents
 
Item 7.    Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
 
Overview
 
Whole
Foods Market, Inc. is the leading natural and organic foods supermarket
and America’s first national “Certified Organic” grocer. Our Company mission is
to promote vitality and well-being for all individuals by supplying the highest
quality, most wholesome foods available. Through our growth, we have had a
significant and positive impact on the natural and organic foods movement
throughout the United States, helping lead the industry to nationwide
acceptance. We opened our first store in Texas in 1980 and, as of September 26,
2010, we operated 299 stores: 288 stores in 38 U.S. states and the District of
Columbia; six stores in Canada; and five stores in the United Kingdom. We have
one operating segment, natural and organic foods supermarkets.
 
Our
results of operations have been and may continue to be materially affected by
the timing and number of new store openings. Stores typically open within 24
months after entering the store development pipeline. New stores generally
become profitable during their first year of operation, although some new
stores may incur operating losses for the first several years of operation.
Gross profit is typically lower in the first fiscal quarter due to the product
mix of holiday sales, and in the fourth fiscal quarter due to the seasonally
slower sales period during the summer months.
 
Sales
of a store are deemed to be comparable commencing in the fifty-third full week
after the store was opened or acquired. Stores acquired in purchase
acquisitions enter the comparable store sales base effective the fifty-third
full week following the date of the merger. Identical store sales exclude sales
from relocated stores and remodeled stores with expansions of square footage
greater than 20% from the comparable calculation to reduce the impact of square
footage growth on the comparison. Stores closed for eight or more days are
excluded from the comparable and identical store base from the first fiscal
week of closure until re-opened for a full fiscal week.
 
The
Company reports its results of operations on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year
ending on the last Sunday in September. Fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 were
52-week years.
 
Economic and Industry Factors
 
Food
retailing is a large, intensely competitive industry. Our competition varies
across the Company and includes but is not limited to local, regional, national
and international conventional and specialty supermarkets, natural foods
stores, warehouse membership clubs, smaller specialty stores, farmers’ markets,
and restaurants, each of which competes with us on the basis of store ambiance
and experience, product selection, quality, customer service, price or a
combination of these factors. Natural and organic food continues to be one of
the fastest growing segments of food retailing today.
 
Highlights for Fiscal Year 2010
 
Whole
Foods Market experienced strong sales and earnings growth in fiscal year 2010
against increasingly tougher sales comparisons in the later quarters of the
year. We are gaining market share at a faster rate than most public food
retailers and attribute much of our success to the progress we have made in our
relative price positioning and to our initiatives in areas such as healthy
eating, animal welfare and sustainable seafood. These initiatives are aligned
with our core customer base and reinforce our position as the authentic
retailer of natural and organic foods, further differentiating the Whole Foods
Market shopping experience and making us the preferred choice for customers
aspiring to a healthier lifestyle. In fiscal year 2010:
 
·                  Sales increased 12.1% over the prior year to
$9.01 billion driven by a 7.1% comparable store sales increase. Identical store
sales increased 6.5% over the prior year;
·                  Income available to common shareholders
increased 102% over the prior year to $240.4 million;
·                  Diluted earnings per share increased 69% over
the prior year to $1.43;
·                  We produced $585.3 million in cash flow from
operations and invested $256.8 million in capital expenditures. We had cash,
restricted cash, and investments totaling approximately $644.7 million at the
end of the fiscal year; and
·                  We repaid $210 million of our term loan,
leaving a remaining balance of $490 million at the end of the fiscal year, and
had $342.9 million available on our credit line.
 
Additionally,
our Board of Directors promoted Walter Robb to co-chief executive officer and
elected him to the Board of Directors, and promoted A.C. Gallo as the Company’s
sole president and chief operating officer. John Mackey, co-founder of the
Company, continues to serve as co-chief executive officer and as a member of
the Board of Directors alongside Mr. Robb.
 
Outlook for Fiscal Year 2011
 
The
Company expects sales growth of 10% to 12% for fiscal year 2011 driven by
weighted average square footage growth of approximately 5% and identical stores
sales growth of 5% to 7%. We are hopeful we can continue to successfully strike
the right balance between driving sales, improving our value offerings and
maintaining margin going forward. The Company
 
18





Table of Contents
 
expects
interest expense, net of investment and other income, to range from
approximately $1 million to $3 million in fiscal year 2011. We expect diluted
earnings per share for fiscal year 2011 to be in the range of $1.66 to $1.71,
or 16% to 20% growth year over year. This guidance reflects steady sales growth
on tougher comparisons as well as our commitment to delivering incremental
earnings growth in excess of sales growth. The Company expects capital
expenditures for fiscal year 2011 to be in the range of approximately $350
million to $400 million. The Company expects to produce cash flows from
operations in excess of its capital expenditure requirements on an annual
basis.
 
Results of Operations
 
The
following table sets forth our statements of operations data expressed as a
percentage of total sales for the fiscal years indicated:
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%




Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


65.2


 


65.7


 


66.0


 




Gross profit


 


34.8


 


34.3


 


34.0


 




Direct store expenses


 


26.4


 


26.7


 


26.5


 




General and administrative expenses


 


3.0


 


3.0


 


3.4


 




Pre-opening expenses


 


0.4


 


0.6


 


0.7


 




Relocation, store closure and lease termination
  costs


 


0.1


 


0.4


 


0.5


 




Operating income


 


4.9


 


3.5


 


3.0


 




Interest expense


 


(0.4


)


(0.5


)


(0.5


)




Investment and other income


 


0.1


 


—


 


0.1


 




Income before income taxes


 


4.6


 


3.1


 


2.6


 




Provision for income taxes


 


1.8


 


1.3


 


1.2


 




Net income


 


2.7


 


1.8


 


1.4


 




Preferred stock dividends


 


0.1


 


0.3


 


—


 




Income available to common shareholders


 


2.7


%


1.5


%


1.4


%



 
Figures may not sum due to rounding.
 
Sales
 
Sales
totaled approximately $9.01 billion, $8.03 billion and $7.95 billion in fiscal
years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively, representing increases of 12.1%, 1.0%
and 20.7% over the previous fiscal years, respectively. Sales for all fiscal
years shown reflect increases due to identical store sales growth and new
stores opened or acquired. We also have worked hard to improve our value image
and believe our success in this regard has played a large role in the sales
momentum we are seeing. Customers are still seeking value as demonstrated by
continued strong sales growth in promotional and store-branded items; however,
national-branded product sales growth is outpacing store-branded sales growth,
and customers are selectively trading up to higher-priced items in certain
areas. Comparable store sales increased approximately 7.1% and 4.9% in fiscal
years 2010 and 2008, respectively, and decreased approximately 3.1% in fiscal
year 2009. As of September 26, 2010, there were 281 locations in the
comparable store base. The number of stores open or acquired 52-weeks or less
equaled 18, 15 and 20 at the end of fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively. The sales increase contributed by stores open or acquired within
52-weeks or less totaled approximately $251.8 million, $234.8 million and
$236.1 million for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Identical
store sales increased approximately 6.5% and 3.6% in fiscal years 2010 and
2008, respectively, and decreased approximately 4.3% in fiscal year 2009.
Identical store sales in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 exclude from the
comparable calculation six, twelve and seven store relocations, respectively,
and two, three and three remodels with major expansions, respectively, during
portions of each fiscal year.
 
Gross Profit
 
Gross
profit totaled approximately $3.14 billion, $2.75 billion and $2.71 billion in
fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Net LIFO inventory reserves
were reduced by approximately $7.7 million and $5.6 million in fiscal years
2010 and 2009, respectively, due primarily to reduced inventory balances and
net deflation in product costs compared to an increase in net reserves of
approximately $12.7 million in fiscal year 2008. During fiscal years 2010 and
2009, the Company realized sequentially lower cost of goods sold by taking
advantage of buying opportunities and improving our distribution, shrink
control and inventory management. We have maintained our commitment to offering
highly competitive prices on known value items in addition to implementing
targeted pricing and promotional strategies. To the extent changes in costs are
not reflected in changes in retail prices or changes in retail prices are
delayed, our gross profit will be affected. Our gross profit may increase or
decrease slightly depending on the mix of sales from new stores or the impact
of weather or a host of other factors, including seasonality, competition,
inflation or deflation. Relative to existing stores, gross profit margins tend
to be lower for new stores and increase as stores mature, reflecting lower
shrink as volumes increase, as well as increasing experience levels and operational
efficiencies of the store teams.
 
19





Table of Contents
 
Direct Store Expenses
 
Direct
store expenses totaled approximately $2.38 billion, $2.15 billion and $2.11
billion in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Decreased direct
store expenses as a percentage of sales in fiscal year 2010 reflect leverage in
depreciation, asset impairment charges, and health care costs, partially offset
by an increase in workers’ compensation expense, as a percentage of sales.
Direct store expenses as a percentage of sales tends to be higher for new
stores and decrease as stores mature, reflecting increasing operational
productivity of the store teams.
 
General and Administrative Expenses
 
General
and administrative expenses totaled approximately $272.4 million, $243.7
million and $270.4 million in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
The decrease in general and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales
starting in fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to cost-containment measures
implemented at the Company’s global and regional offices beginning in the
fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008. General and administrative expenses for
fiscal year 2010 include share-based payment costs related to restricted common
stock grants of approximately $4.2 million. General and administrative expenses
for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 include FTC-related legal costs totaling
approximately $2.5 million, $14.7 million and $2.5 million, respectively.
 
Pre-opening Expenses
 
Pre-opening
expenses totaled approximately $38.0 million, $49.2 million and $55.6 million
in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The Company opened 16, 15
and 20 new store locations during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively. Average pre-opening expense per new store, including pre-opening
rent, totaled approximately $2.6 million, $3.0 million and $2.5 million in
fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
 
Relocation, Store Closure and Lease Termination Costs
 
Relocation,
store closure and lease termination costs totaled approximately $11.2 million,
$31.2 million and $36.5 million in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively. The Company relocated or closed 1, 6 and 21 store locations
during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Fiscal year 2008 store
closures primarily relate to the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. Relocation,
store closure and lease termination costs for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008
include charges totaling approximately $6.9 million, $9.5 million and $14.7
million, respectively, to increase store closure reserves for increased
estimated net lease obligations for closed stores and approximately $1.0
million, $4.4 million and $5.5 million, respectively, in costs related to lease
modifications or terminations for stores previously in development. During
fiscal year 2010, the Company recorded a gain totaling approximately $3.2
million related to the sale of a non-operating property. The Company recorded a
charge totaling approximately $4.8 million in fiscal year 2009 to adjust the
carrying value of leases and fixed assets to fair value relating to the
potential sale of certain operating locations as part of the Federal Trade
Commission (“FTC”) settlement agreement.
 
Interest Expense
 
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized, was approximately $33.0
million, $36.9 million and $36.4 million in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively. Interest expense for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 consists
principally of interest expense on the term loan we entered into on August 28,
2007 to finance the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. The reduction in net
interest expense in fiscal year 2010 is primarily due to the repayment during
the third quarter of the $210 million portion of the term loan that was not
subject to an interest rate swap agreement. The Company had no amounts
outstanding on its revolving line of credit at September 26, 2010 or September 27,
2009.
 
Investment and Other Income
 
Investment
and other income includes investment gains and losses, interest income, rental
income and other income totaling approximately $6.9 million, $3.4 million and
$6.7 million in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The Company
held higher average investment balances during fiscal year 2010.
 
Income Taxes
 
Income
taxes resulted in an effective tax rate of approximately 40.3%, 41.5% and 44.5%
in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The higher effective tax
rate for fiscal year 2008 resulted primarily from the repatriation of cash from
the Company’s Canadian subsidiary.
 
20





Table of Contents
 
Share-Based Payments
 
Share-based
payment expense before income taxes recognized during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and
2008 was approximately $22.9 million, $12.8 million and $10.5 million,
respectively. Share-based payment expense was included in the following line
items on the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the periods indicated
(in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


$


862


 


$


439


 


$


233


 




Direct store expenses


 


10,140


 


7,152


 


5,300


 




General and administrative expenses


 


11,892


 


5,204


 


4,972


 




Share-based payment expense before income taxes


 


22,894


 


12,795


 


10,505


 




Income tax benefit


 


(9,170


)


(5,222


)


(4,815


)




Net share-based payment expense


 


$


13,724


 


$


7,573


 


$


5,690


 



 
The
Company intends to keep its stock incentive program in place, but also intends
to limit the number of shares granted in any one year so that annual earnings
per share dilution from share-based payment expense will not exceed 10%. The
Company believes this strategy is best aligned with its stakeholder philosophy
because it limits future earnings per share dilution from options and at the
same time retains the broad-based stock option plan, which the Company believes
is important to team member morale, its unique corporate culture and its
success.
 
Liquidity and Capital Resources
 
The
following table summarizes the Company’s cash and short-term investments for
the fiscal years indicated (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




Cash and cash equivalents


 


$


131,996


 


$


430,130


 




Short-term investments — available-for-sale
  securities


 


329,738


 


—


 




Restricted cash


 


86,802


 


71,023


 




Total


 


$


548,536


 


$


501,153


 



 
We
generated cash flows from operating activities of approximately $585.3 million,
$587.7 million and $335.0 million in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively. Cash flows from operating activities resulted primarily from our
net income plus non-cash expenses and changes in operating working capital.
 
Net
cash used in investing activities totaled approximately $715.4 million, $386.3
million and $372.7 million for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
Approximately $425.6 million of the net cash used in investing activities for
fiscal year 2010 resulted from our investment of a portion of our available
cash balances in available-for-sale securities. At September 26, 2010, we
had short-term investments in available-for-sale securities totaling approximately
$329.7 million and long-term investments in available-for-sale securities
totaling approximately $96.1 million. During fiscal year 2008, net cash used in
investing activities was partially offset by approximately $163.9 million
received from the sale of 35 operating locations under the Henry’s Farmers
Market and Sun Harvest banners. Our principal historical capital requirements
have been the funding of the development or acquisition of new stores and
acquisition of property and equipment for existing stores. The required cash
investment for new stores varies depending on the size of the new store,
geographic location, degree of work performed by the landlord and complexity of
site development issues. Capital expenditures for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and
2008 totaled approximately $256.8 million, $314.6 million and $529.5 million,
respectively, of which approximately $171.4 million, $248.0 million and $357.5
million, respectively, was for new store development and approximately $85.4
million, $66.6 million and $172.0 million, respectively, was for remodels and
other property and equipment expenditures.
 
21





Table of
Contents
 
The
following table provides information about the Company’s store development
activities:
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Properties


 


Total


 




 


 


Stores opened


 


Stores opened


 


tendered


 


leases signed


 




 


 


during fiscal


 


during fiscal


 


as of


 


as of


 




 


 


year 2009


 


year 2010


 


November 3, 2010


 


November 3, 2010(1)


 




Number of stores (including relocations)


 


15


 


16


 


11


 


52


 




Number of relocations


 


6


 


—


 


3


 


9


 




Number of lease acquisitions, ground leases and
  owned properties


 


4


 


—


 


4


 


4


 




New areas


 


1


 


4


 


1


 


8


 




Average store size (gross square feet)


 


53,500


 


42,600


 


41,100


 


38,700


 




Total square footage


 


801,800


 


682,200


 


451,900


 


2,051,800


 




Average tender period in months


 


12.6


 


10.9


 


 


 


 


 




Average pre-opening expense per store


 


$


3.0 million


 


$


2.6 million


 


 


 


 


 




Average pre-opening rent per store


 


$


1.3 million


 


$


1.2 million


 


 


 


 


 



 
(1) Includes leased properties
tendered
 
The
following table provides information about the Company’s historical store
growth:
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Stores at beginning of fiscal year


 


284


 


275


 


276


 




Stores opened


 


16


 


15


 


20


 




Acquired stores


 


2


 


—


 


—


 




Divested stores


 


(2


)


—


 


—


 




Relocated stores


 


—


 


(5


)


(7


)




Closed stores


 


(1


)


(1


)


(14


)




Stores at end of fiscal year


 


299


 


284


 


275


 




Remodels with major expansions(1)


 


—


 


2


 


1


 




Total gross square footage at end of fiscal year


 


11,231,000


 


10,566,000


 


9,895,000


 




Year-over-year growth


 


6


%


7


%


6


%



 
(1) Defined as remodels with
expansions of square footage greater than 20% completed during the fiscal year.
 
The
Company has opened two stores in fiscal year 2011 as of November 3, 2010.
The following table provides additional information about the Company’s
estimated store openings for the remainder of fiscal years 2011 through 2014
based on the Company’s current development pipeline. These openings reflect
estimated tender dates which are subject to change and do not incorporate any
potential new leases, terminations or square footage reductions:
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Average


 


 


 


Ending


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


new store


 


Ending


 


square


 




 


 


Total


 


 


 


square


 


square


 


footage


 




 


 


openings


 


Relocations


 


footage


 


footage(1)


 


growth


 




Remaining fiscal year 2011 stores in development


 


15


 


6


 


41,400


 


11,762,800


 


5


%




Fiscal year 2012 stores in development


 


20


 


—


 


36,500


 


12,493,500


 


6


%




Fiscal year 2013 stores in development


 


14


 


3


 


36,600


 


12,920,700


 


3


%




Fiscal year 2014 stores in development


 


3


 


—


 


48,800


 


13,067,200


 


1


%




Total


 


52


 


9


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



 
(1) Reflects
openings in fiscal year 2011 through November 3, 2010 and three scheduled
expansions in fiscal year 2011.
 
Net
cash used in financing activities totaled approximately $168.9 million in
fiscal year 2010. Net cash provided by financing activities totaled
approximately $199.5 million and $69.8 million in fiscal years 2009 and 2008,
respectively. Proceeds from the exercise of stock options by team members are
driven by a number of factors, including fluctuations in our stock price, and
totaled approximately $47.0 million, $4.3 million and $18.0 million in fiscal
years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
 
During
fiscal year 2007, the Company entered into a $700 million, five-year term loan
agreement to finance the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. During the third
quarter of fiscal year 2010, the Company repaid the $210 million portion of the
term loan that was not subject to an interest rate swap agreement. At September 26,
2010, the Company had outstanding $490 million under this agreement. Subsequent
to year-end, the Company repaid an additional $100 million on the term loan,
bringing the current outstanding to $390 million. The loan, which is secured by
a pledge of substantially all of the stock in our subsidiaries, bears interest
at our option of the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin, currently
0.5%, or
 
22





Table of Contents
 
LIBOR
plus an applicable margin, currently 1.5%, based on the Company’s Moody’s and
S&P rating. The interest period on LIBOR borrowings may range from one to
six months at our option. The participating banks obtained security interests
in certain of the Company’s assets to collateralize amounts outstanding under
the term loan in the first quarter of fiscal year 2009. The term loan agreement
contains certain affirmative covenants including maintenance of certain
financial ratios and certain negative covenants including limitations on
additional indebtedness and payments as defined in the agreement. At September 26,
2010, we were in compliance with all applicable debt covenants.
 
The Company also has outstanding a $350 million revolving line of
credit, which is secured by a pledge of substantially all of the stock in our
subsidiaries, that extends to 2012. The credit agreement contains certain
affirmative covenants including maintenance of certain financial ratios and
certain negative covenants including limitations on additional indebtedness and
payments as defined in the agreement. At September 26, 2010, we were in
compliance with all applicable debt covenants. All outstanding amounts borrowed
under this agreement bear interest at our option of the ABR plus an applicable
margin, currently 0.625%, or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, currently 1.625%,
based on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P rating. The participating banks
obtained security interests in certain of the Company’s assets to collateralize
amounts outstanding under the revolving credit facility in the first quarter of
fiscal year 2009. Commitment fees on the undrawn amount, reduced by outstanding
letters of credit, are payable under this agreement. No amounts were drawn
under this agreement at September 26, 2010 and September 27, 2009.
The amount available to the Company under the agreement was effectively reduced
to $342.9 million and $335.2 million by outstanding letters of credit totaling
approximately $7.1 million and $14.8 million at September 26, 2010 and September 27,
2009, respectively.
 
The
Company assumed convertible debentures totaling approximately $115.0 million in
the Wild Oats acquisition, of which approximately $21.8 million was paid off
during fiscal year 2008. We had outstanding convertible subordinated debentures
which had a carrying amount of approximately $2.7 million at September 28,
2008. In fiscal year 2009, the Company redeemed all remaining debentures at a
redemption price equal to the issue price plus accrued original issue discount
totaling approximately $2.7 million.
 
On December 2, 2008, the Company issued 425,000 shares of Series A
8% Redeemable, Convertible Exchangeable Participating Preferred Stock, $0.01
par value per share (“Series A Preferred Stock”) to affiliates of Leonard
Green & Partners, L.P., for approximately $413.1 million, net of
approximately $11.9 million in closing and issuance costs. On October 23,
2009, the Company announced its intention to call all 425,000 outstanding
shares of the Series A Preferred Stock for redemption on November 27,
2009 in accordance with the terms governing such Series A Preferred Stock
at a price per share equal to $1,000 plus accrued and unpaid dividends. In
accordance with the terms governing the Series A Preferred Stock, at any
time prior to the redemption date, the Series A Preferred Stock could be
converted by the holders thereof. On November 26, 2009, the holders
converted all 425,000 outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock into
approximately 29.7 million shares of common stock of the Company. The Company
paid cash dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock totaling $8.5 million
and approximately $19.8 million during fiscal years 2010 and 2009,
respectively.
 
The
Company is committed under certain capital leases for rental of equipment,
buildings, and land and certain operating leases for rental of facilities and
equipment. These leases expire or become subject to renewal clauses at various
dates from 2011 to 2054.
 
The
following table shows payments due by period on contractual obligations as of September 26,
2010 (in thousands):
 



 


 


 


 


Less than 1


 


1-3


 


3-5


 


More than 5


 




 


 


Total


 


year


 


years


 


years


 


years


 




Long term debt obligations


 


$


490,000


 


$


—


 


$


490,000


 


$


—


 


$


—


 




Estimated interest on long term debt obligations


 


14,602


 


7,929


 


6,673


 


—


 


—


 




Capital lease obligations (including interest)


 


37,142


 


2,061


 


4,169


 


4,262


 


26,650


 




Operating lease obligations(1)


 


6,006,492


 


294,985


 


645,707


 


675,812


 


4,389,988


 




Total


 


$


6,548,236


 


$


304,975


 


$


1,146,549


 


$


680,074


 


$


4,416,638


 



 
(1)
Amounts exclude taxes, insurance and other
related expenses.
 
At
September 26, 2010, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits
totaling approximately $14.9 million including interest and penalties. Although
a reasonably reliable estimate of the period of cash settlement with respective
taxing authorities cannot be determined due to the high degree of uncertainty
regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with the Company’s
unrecognized tax benefits, as of September 26, 2010, the Company believes
it is reasonably possible that tax audit resolutions could reduce its
unrecognized tax benefits in the next 12 months by approximately $5.4 million.
 
23





Table of Contents
 
We
periodically make other commitments and become subject to other contractual
obligations that we believe to be routine in nature and incidental to the
operation of the business. Management believes that such routine commitments
and contractual obligations do not have a material impact on our business,
financial condition or results of operations.
 
Following
is a summary of dividends declared on common shares in fiscal year 2008 (in
thousands, except per share amounts):
 



Date of


 


Dividend per


 


Date of


 


Date of


 


Total


 




declaration


 


common share


 


record


 


payment


 


amount


 




November 20, 2007


 


$


0.20


 


January 11, 2008


 


January 22, 2008


 


$


27,901


 




March 10, 2008


 


0.20


 


April 11, 2008


 


April 22, 2008


 


28,041


 




June 11, 2008


 


0.20


 


July 11, 2008


 


July 22, 2008


 


28,057


 

















 
During
the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, the Company’s Board of Directors
suspended the quarterly cash dividend on common shares.
 
During
fiscal year 2008, the Company retired approximately 4.5 million shares held in
treasury that had been repurchased for a total of approximately $200 million.
On November 8, 2009, the Company’s stock repurchase program expired in
accordance with its terms.
 
The
effect of exchange rate changes on cash included in the Consolidated Statements
of Cash Flows resulted in an increase in cash and cash equivalents totaling
approximately $0.9 million for fiscal year 2010 and decreases in cash and cash
equivalents totaling approximately $1.3 million and $1.6 million for fiscal
years 2009 and 2008, reflecting the relative strengthening and weakening of the
Canadian and United Kingdom currencies compared to the U.S. dollar during these
periods.
 
Our
principal historical sources of liquidity have been cash generated by
operations, available cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and
amounts available under our revolving line of credit. Absent any significant
change in market condition, we expect planned expansion and other anticipated
working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next twelve months
will be funded by these sources. There can be no assurance, however, that the
Company will continue to generate cash flows at or above current levels or that
our revolving line of credit and other sources of capital will be available to
us in the future.
 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
 
Our
off-balance sheet arrangements at September 26, 2010 consist of operating
leases disclosed in the above contractual obligations table and the undrawn
portion of our revolving credit facility discussed in Note 10 to the
consolidated financial statements, “Long-Term Debt,” in “Item 8. Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data.” We have no other off-balance sheet
arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a material
current or future effect on our consolidated financial statements or financial
condition.
 
Critical Accounting Policies
 
The
preparation of our financial statements in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect
the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related
disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. Actual amounts may differ
from these estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on
various other assumptions and factors that we believe to be reasonable under
the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate the continued
appropriateness of our accounting policies and resulting estimates to make
adjustments we consider appropriate under the facts and circumstances.
 
We
have chosen accounting policies that we believe are appropriate to report
accurately and fairly our operating results and financial position, and we
apply those accounting policies in a consistent manner. Our significant
accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 to the consolidated financial
statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We believe
that the following accounting policies are the most critical in the preparation
of our financial statements because they involve the most difficult, subjective
or complex judgments about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
 
Inventory Valuation
 
We
value our inventories at the lower of cost or market. Cost was determined using
the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method for approximately 93.9% and 93.6% of
inventories at September 26, 2010 and September 27, 2009,
respectively. Under the LIFO method, the cost assigned to items sold is based
on the cost of the most recent items purchased. As a result, the costs of the
first items purchased remain in inventory and are used to value ending
inventory. The excess of estimated current costs over LIFO carrying value, or
LIFO reserve, was approximately $19.4 million and $27.1 million at September 26,
2010 and September 27, 2009, respectively. 
Costs for remaining inventories are determined by the first-in,
first-out (“FIFO”) method.
 
24





Table of Contents
 
Cost
is determined using the item cost method and the retail method for inventories.
The item cost method involves counting each item in inventory, assigning costs
to each of these items based on the actual purchase cost (net of vendor
allowances) of each item and recording the actual cost of items sold. The item
cost method of accounting enables management to more precisely manage inventory
and purchasing levels when compared to the retail method of accounting. Under
the retail method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the resulting gross
margins are determined by counting each item in inventory, then applying a
cost-to-retail ratio for various groupings of similar items to the retail value
of inventories. Inherent in the retail inventory method calculations are
certain management judgments and estimates which could impact the ending
inventory valuation at cost as well as the resulting gross margins.
 
Our
cost-to-retail ratios contain uncertainties because the calculation requires
management to make assumptions and to apply judgment regarding inventory mix,
inventory spoilage and inventory shrink. Because of the significance of the
judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different
amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying
circumstances were to change. A 10% difference in our cost-to-retail ratios at September 26,
2010 would have affected net income by approximately $1.3 million for fiscal
year 2010.
 
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
 
Goodwill
consists of the excess of cost of acquired enterprises over the sum of the
amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired less liabilities assumed.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually at the beginning of the Company’s
fourth fiscal quarter, or more frequently if impairment indicators arise, on a
reporting unit level. We allocate goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill
impairment testing. We compare our fair value, which is determined utilizing
both a market value method and discounted projected future cash flows, to our
carrying value for the purpose of identifying impairment. Our annual impairment
review requires extensive use of accounting judgment and financial estimates.
Application of alternative assumptions and definitions, such as reviewing
goodwill for impairment at a different organizational level, could produce
significantly different results. Because of the significance of the judgments
and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different amounts could
be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances
were to change.
 
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Long-Lived Assets
to be Disposed of
 
We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes
in circumstances, such as unplanned negative cash flow or short lease life, indicate
that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of
assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount
of an asset to future undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the
asset. If such assets are determined to be impaired, the impairment to be
recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets
exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at
the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. Application
of alternative assumptions, such as changes in estimate of future cash flows,
could produce significantly different results. Because of the significance of
the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different
amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying
circumstances were to change.
 
Derivative Instruments
 
The
Company utilizes derivative financial instruments to hedge its exposure to
changes in interest rates. All derivative financial instruments are recorded on
the balance sheet at their respective fair value. The Company does not use
financial instruments or derivatives for any trading or other speculative
purposes.
 
During
fiscal year 2008, the Company entered into a three-year interest rate swap
agreement with a notional amount of $490 million to effectively fix the
interest rate on $490 million of the term loan at 4.718%, excluding the
applicable margin and associated fees. The interest rate swap was designated as
a cash flow hedge. Hedge effectiveness is measured by comparing the change in
fair value of the hedge item with the change in fair value of the derivative
instrument. The effective portion of the gain or loss of the hedge is recorded
on the Consolidated Balance Sheets under the caption “Accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss).” Any ineffective portion of the hedge, as well as
amounts not included in the assessment of effectiveness, is recorded on the
accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations under the caption “Interest
expense.” Subsequent to year-end, the swap agreement expired and the carrying
amount was paid.
 
Insurance and Self-Insurance Liabilities
 
The
Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for
the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability,
property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle
liability and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the
risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering
historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other
actuarial assumptions. While we believe that our assumptions are appropriate,
the estimated accruals for these liabilities could be significantly affected if
future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical
trends.
 
25





Table of Contents
 
We
have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to
establish our insurance and self-insured liabilities during the past three
fiscal years.
 
Because
of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely
that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different
assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. A 10% change in
our insurance and self-insured liabilities at September 26, 2010 would
have affected net income by approximately $6.0 million for fiscal year 2010.
 
Reserves for Closed Properties
 
The
Company maintains reserves for retail stores and other properties that are no
longer being utilized in current operations. The Company provides for closed
property operating lease liabilities using a discount rate to calculate the
present value of the remaining non-cancelable lease payments and lease
termination fees after the closing date, net of estimated subtenant income. The
closed property lease liabilities are expected to be paid over the remaining
lease terms, which generally range from 1 to 19 years. The reserves for closed
properties include management’s estimates for lease subsidies, lease
terminations and future payments on exited real estate. The Company estimates
subtenant income and future cash flows based on the Company’s experience and
knowledge of the area in which the closed property is located, the Company’s
previous efforts to dispose of similar assets, existing economic conditions and
when necessary utilizes local real estate brokers.
 
Adjustments
to closed property reserves primarily relate to changes in estimated subtenant
income or actual exit costs differing from original estimates. Adjustments are
made for changes in estimates in the period in which the changes become known.
 
Because
of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely
that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different
assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. A 10% change in
our closed property reserves at September 26, 2010 would have affected net
income by a maximum of approximately $3.5 million for fiscal year 2010. Any
reductions in reserves for closed properties established as part of the Wild
Oats Markets acquisition will be applied against goodwill and will not impact
earnings.
 
Share-Based Payments
 
The
Company maintains several share-based incentive plans. We grant both options to
purchase common stock and restricted common stock under our Whole Foods Market
2009 Stock Incentive Plan. All options outstanding are governed by the original
terms and conditions of the grants. Options are granted at an option price
equal to the market value of the stock at the grant date and generally vest
ratably over a four- or nine-year period beginning one year from grant date and
have a five, seven, or ten year term. The grant date is established once the
Company’s Board of Directors approves the grant and all key terms have been
determined. The exercise prices of our stock option grants are the closing
price on the grant date. Stock option grant terms and conditions are
communicated to team members within a relatively short period of time. Our
Company generally approves one primary stock option grant annually, occurring
during a trading window. Restricted common stock is granted at the market price
of the stock on the day of grant and generally vests over a three-month period.
 
The
Company uses the Black-Scholes multiple option pricing model which requires
extensive use of accounting judgment and financial estimates, including
estimates of the expected term team members will retain their vested stock
options before exercising them, the estimated volatility of the Company’s
common stock price over the expected term, and the number of options that will
be forfeited prior to the completion of their vesting requirements. The related
share-based payment expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the
vesting period. The tax savings resulting from tax deductions in excess of
expense reflected in the Company’s financial statements are reflected as a
financing cash flow. Application of alternative assumptions could produce
significantly different estimates of the fair value of share-based payment
expense and consequently, the related amounts recognized in the Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
 
All
full-time team members with a minimum of 400 hours of service may purchase our
common stock through payroll deductions under the Company’s Team Member Stock
Purchase Plan (“TMSPP”). The TMSPP provides for a 5% discount on the shares
purchase date market value which meets the share-based payment, “Safe Harbor”
provisions, and therefore is non-compensatory. As a result, no compensation
expense will be recognized for our employee stock purchase plan.
 
The
Company intends to keep its broad-based stock option program in place, but also
intends to limit the number of shares granted in any one year so that annual
earnings per share dilution from share-based payment expense will not exceed
10%.
 
We
do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material
change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to determine share-based
payment expense. However, if actual results are not consistent with our
estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes in share-based payment
expense that could be material.
 
26





Table of Contents
 
Because
of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely
that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different
assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. A 10% change in
our share-based payment expense would have affected net income by approximately
$1.4 million for fiscal year 2010.
 
Income Taxes
 
We
recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities by applying statutory tax
rates in effect at the balance sheet date to differences between the book basis
and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and
liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable
income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to
reverse. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted to reflect changes in
tax laws or rates in the period that includes the enactment date. Significant
accounting judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes
and related accruals, deferred tax assets and liabilities. In the ordinary
course of business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate
tax outcome is uncertain. In addition, we are subject to periodic audits and
examinations by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other state and local
taxing authorities. Although we believe that our estimates are reasonable,
actual results could differ from these estimates.
 
The
Company recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is
more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by
the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax
benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be
measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of
being realized upon ultimate settlement.
 
To the extent we prevail in matters for which reserves have been
established, or are required to pay amounts in excess of our reserves, our
effective income tax rate in a given financial statement period could be materially
affected. An unfavorable tax settlement would require use of our cash and would
result in an increase in our effective income tax rate in the period of
resolution. A favorable tax settlement would be recognized as a reduction in
our effective income tax rate in the period of resolution.
 
Disclaimer on Forward-Looking Statements
 
Except
for the historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this
analysis are forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties,
including but not limited to general business conditions, the timely
development and opening of new stores, the integration of acquired stores, the
impact of competition and changes in government regulation. For a discussion of
these and other risks and uncertainties that may affect our business, see “Item
1A. Risk Factors.” The Company does not undertake any obligation to update
forward-looking statements.
 
Item 7A.   Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
 
We
are exposed to interest rate changes and changes in market values of our
investments and long-term debt. We do not use financial instruments for trading
or other speculative purposes. We are also exposed to foreign exchange
fluctuations on our foreign subsidiaries.
 
The
analysis presented for each of our market risk sensitive instruments is based
on a 10% change in interest or currency exchange rates. These changes are
hypothetical scenarios used to calibrate potential risk and do not represent
our view of future market changes. As the hypothetical figures discussed below
indicate, changes in fair value based on the assumed change in rates generally
cannot be extrapolated because the relationship of the change in assumption to
the change in fair value may not be linear. The effect of a variation in a
particular assumption is calculated without changing any other assumption. In
reality, changes in one factor may result in changes in another, which may
magnify or counteract the sensitivities.
 
Interest Rate Risk
 
We
seek to minimize the risks from interest rate fluctuations through ongoing
evaluation of the composition of our investments and long-term debt.
 
The
Company holds money market fund investments that are classified as cash
equivalents and restricted cash. We had cash equivalent investments and
restricted cash investments totaling approximately $25.8 million and $86.6
million, respectively, at September 26, 2010. Cash equivalent investments
and restricted cash investments totaled approximately $439.0 million and $70.4
million, respectively, at September 27, 2009. These investments are
generally short-term in nature, and therefore changes in interest rates would
not have a material impact on the valuation of these investments. During fiscal
year 2010, a hypothetical 10% increase or decrease in interest rates would have
resulted in an increase or decrease in interest income earned on these
investments of approximately $0.1 million.
 
27





Table of Contents
 
The
Company also holds available-for-sale securities that are classified as
short-term and long-term investments generally consisting of state and local
government obligations. We had short-term investments totaling approximately
$329.7 million and long-term investments totaling approximately $96.1 million
at September 26, 2010. The Company had no available-for-sale securities at
September 27, 2009. These investments are recorded at fair value and are
generally short-term in nature, and therefore changes in interest rates would
not have a material impact on the valuation of these investments. During fiscal
year 2010, a hypothetical 10% increase or decrease in interest rates would have
resulted in an increase or decrease in interest income earned on these
investments of approximately $0.2 million.
 
We
have outstanding a five-year term loan agreement that bears interest at our
option of the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin or LIBOR
plus an applicable margin, based on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P ratings.
We had $490 million and $700 million outstanding on the term loan at September 26,
2010 and September 27, 2009, respectively. At September 26, 2010 and September 27,
2009 the loan bore interest based on LIBOR. We believe our term loans do not
give rise to significant fair value risk because they are variable interest
rate loans with revolving maturities which reflect market changes to interest
rates and contain variable risk premiums based on the Company’s corporate
ratings. The Company entered into a three-year interest rate swap agreement
with a notional amount of $490 million to fix the interest rate at 4.718%,
excluding applicable margin and associated fees, to help manage our exposure to
interest rate fluctuations. The swap agreement expired on October 1, 2010.
 
We
also have outstanding a $350 million revolving line of credit that extends to
2012. All outstanding amounts under this agreement bear interest at our option
of the ABR plus an applicable margin or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, based
on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P ratings. At September 26, 2010 and September 27,
2009 no amounts were drawn. We believe our line of credit borrowings do not
give rise to significant fair value risk because these borrowings have
revolving maturities and contain variable risk premiums based on the Company’s
corporate credit ratings.
 
Additional
term loan and line of credit information for September 26, 2010 and September 27,
2009 are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




Term loan agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding loan balance


 


$


490,000


 


$


700,000


 




Fair value of swap agreement liability


 


$


399


 


$


20,588


 




Variable interest rate, excluding applicable
  margin on non-swap portion of loan


 


0.553


%


0.253


%




Interest rate swap fixed interest rate, excluding
  applicable margin


 


4.718


%


4.718


%




Applicable margin — LIBOR, based on Moody’s and
  S&P ratings


 


1.500


%


1.750


%




Applicable margin — ABR, based on Moody’s and
  S&P ratings


 


0.500


%


0.750


%




 


 


 


 


 


 




Line of credit agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding line of credit balance


 


$


—


 


$


—


 




Variable interest rate, excluding applicable
  margin


 


n/a


 


n/a


 




Applicable margin — LIBOR, based on Moody’s and
  S&P ratings


 


1.625


%


1.875


%




Applicable margin — ABR, based on Moody’s and
  S&P ratings


 


0.625


%


0.875


%



 
Foreign Currency Risk
 
The
Company is exposed to foreign currency exchange risk. We own and operate six
stores in Canada and five stores in the United Kingdom. Sales made from the
Canadian and United Kingdom stores are made in exchange for Canadian dollars
and Great Britain pounds, respectively. The Company does not currently hedge
against the risk of exchange rate fluctuations.
 
At
September 26, 2010, a hypothetical 10% change in value of the U.S. dollar
relative to the Canadian dollar or Great Britain pound would have resulted in
an immaterial change to our consolidated financial statements.
 
28





Table of Contents
 
Item 8.    Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data.
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Index to Consolidated Financial Statements



 


 


Page




 


 


Number




Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting
  Firm


 


30




Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting
  Firm on Internal Control over Financial Reporting


 


31




Consolidated
  Balance Sheets at September 26, 2010, and September 27, 2009


 


32




Consolidated
  Statements of Operations for the fiscal years ended September 26, 2010,
  September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008


 


33




Consolidated
  Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and Comprehensive Income for the fiscal
  years ended September 26, 2010, September 27, 2009 and
  September 28, 2008


 


34




Consolidated
  Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal years ended September 26, 2010,
  September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008


 


35




Notes to
  Consolidated Financial Statements


 


36



 
29





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting
Firm
 
To
the Board of Directors and Shareholders
Whole
Foods Market, Inc.
 
We
have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Whole Foods Market, Inc.
as of September 26, 2010 and September 27, 2009, and the related
consolidated statements of operations, shareholders’ equity and comprehensive
income, and cash flows for each of the three fiscal years in the period ended September 26,
2010. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s
management.  Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
 
We
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
In
our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all
material respects, the consolidated financial position of Whole Foods Market, Inc.
at September 26, 2010 and September 27, 2009, and the consolidated
results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three fiscal
years in the period ended September 26, 2010, in conformity with U.S.
generally accepted accounting principles.
 
As
discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company
changed its method of accounting for business combinations with the adoption of
guidance originally issued in FASB Statement No. 141(R), Business Combinations (codified in FASB
ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations)
effective September 28, 2009.
 
We
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States), Whole Foods Market, Inc.’s
internal control over financial reporting as of September 26, 2010, based
on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework issued by
the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our
report dated November 24, 2010 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 
 
/s/
Ernst & Young LLP
Austin,
Texas
November 24,
2010
 
30





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
To
the Board of Directors and Shareholders
Whole
Foods Market, Inc.
 
We
have audited Whole Foods Market, Inc.’s internal control over financial
reporting as of September 26, 2010, based on criteria established in
Internal Control - Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (the COSO criteria). Whole Foods
Market, Inc.’s management is responsible for maintaining effective
internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the
accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the company’s internal control
over financial reporting based on our audit.
 
We
conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective
internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control
over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists,
testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal
control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we
considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
A
company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control
over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain
to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors
of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention
or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the
company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
 
Because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements.  Also,
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.
 
In
our opinion, Whole Foods Market, Inc. maintained, in all material
respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of September 26,
2010, based on the COSO criteria.
 
We
have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated balance sheets of
Whole Foods Market, Inc. as of September 26, 2010 and September 27,
2009, and the related consolidated statements of operations, shareholders’
equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the three fiscal
years in the period ended September 26, 2010 of Whole Foods Market, Inc.
and our report dated November 24, 2010 expressed an unqualified opinion
thereon.
 
 
/s/
Ernst & Young LLP
Austin,
Texas
November 24,
2010
 
31





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(In
thousands)
September 26,
2010 and September 27, 2009
 



Assets


 


2010


 


2009


 




Current assets:


 


 


 


 


 




Cash and cash equivalents


 


$


131,996


 


$


430,130


 




Short-term investments — available-for-sale
  securities


 


329,738


 


—


 




Restricted cash


 


86,802


 


71,023


 




Accounts receivable


 


133,346


 


104,731


 




Merchandise inventories


 


323,487


 


310,602


 




Prepaid expenses and other current assets


 


54,686


 


51,137


 




Deferred income taxes


 


101,464


 


87,757


 




Total current assets


 


1,161,519


 


1,055,380


 




Property and equipment, net of accumulated
  depreciation and amortization


 


1,886,130


 


1,897,853


 




Long-term investments — available-for-sale
  securities


 


96,146


 


—


 




Goodwill


 


665,224


 


658,254


 




Intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization


 


69,064


 


73,035


 




Deferred income taxes


 


99,156


 


91,000


 




Other assets


 


9,301


 


7,866


 




Total assets


 


$


3,986,540


 


$


3,783,388


 



 



Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity


 


 


 


 


 




Current liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 




Current installments of long-term debt and capital
  lease obligations


 


$


410


 


$


389


 




Accounts payable


 


213,212


 


189,597


 




Accrued payroll, bonus and other benefits due team
  members


 


244,427


 


207,983


 




Dividends payable


 


—


 


8,217


 




Other current liabilities


 


289,823


 


277,838


 




Total current liabilities


 


747,872


 


684,024


 




Long-term debt and capital lease obligations, less
  current installments


 


508,288


 


738,848


 




Deferred lease liabilities


 


294,291


 


250,326


 




Other long-term liabilities


 


62,831


 


69,262


 




Total liabilities


 


1,613,282


 


1,742,460


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




Series A redeemable preferred stock, $0.01
  par value, 425 shares authorized; 
  zero and 425 shares issued and outstanding at 2010 and 2009, respectively


 


—


 


413,052


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




Shareholders’ equity:


 


 


 


 


 




Common stock, no par value, 300,000 shares
  authorized; 172,033 and 140,542 shares 
  issued and outstanding at 2010 and 2009, respectively


 


1,773,897


 


1,283,028


 




Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)


 


791


 


(13,367


)




Retained earnings


 


598,570


 


358,215


 




Total shareholders’ equity


 


2,373,258


 


1,627,876


 




Commitments and contingencies


 


 


 


 


 




Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity


 


$


3,986,540


 


$


3,783,388


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
 
32





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(In
thousands, except per share amounts)
Fiscal
years ended September 26, 2010, September 27, 2009 and September 28,
2008
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Sales


 


$


9,005,794


 


$


8,031,620


 


$


7,953,912


 




Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


5,870,393


 


5,277,310


 


5,247,207


 




Gross profit


 


3,135,401


 


2,754,310


 


2,706,705


 




Direct store expenses


 


2,375,716


 


2,145,809


 


2,107,940


 




General and administrative expenses


 


272,449


 


243,749


 


270,428


 




Pre-opening expenses


 


38,044


 


49,218


 


55,554


 




Relocation, store closure and lease termination
  costs


 


11,217


 


31,185


 


36,545


 




Operating income


 


437,975


 


284,349


 


236,238


 




Interest expense


 


(33,048


)


(36,856


)


(36,416


)




Investment and other income


 


6,854


 


3,449


 


6,697


 




Income before income taxes


 


411,781


 


250,942


 


206,519


 




Provision for income taxes


 


165,948


 


104,138


 


91,995


 




Net income


 


245,833


 


146,804


 


114,524


 




Preferred stock dividends


 


5,478


 


28,050


 


—


 




Income available to common shareholders


 


$


240,355


 


$


118,754


 


$


114,524


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings per share


 


$


1.45


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 




Weighted average shares outstanding


 


166,244


 


140,414


 


139,886


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Diluted earnings per share


 


$


1.43


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 




Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted basis


 


171,710


 


140,414


 


140,011


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dividends declared per common share


 


$


—


 


$


—


 


$


0.60


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
 
33





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and
Comprehensive Income
(In
thousands)
Fiscal
years ended September 26, 2010, September 27, 2009 and September 28,
2008
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Accumulated


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


Common


 


other


 


 


 


Total


 




 


 


Shares


 


Common


 


stock in


 


comprehensive


 


Retained


 


shareholders’


 




 


 


outstanding


 


stock


 


treasury


 


income (loss)


 


earnings


 


equity


 




Balances at September 30, 2007


 


139,240


 


$


1,232,845


 


$


(199,961


)


$


15,722


 


$


410,198


 


$


1,458,804


 




Net income


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


114,524


 


114,524


 




Foreign currency translation adjustments


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(7,714


)


—


 


(7,714


)




Reclassification adjustments for amounts included
  in income, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


2,302


 


—


 


2,302


 




Change in unrealized losses, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(9,888


)


—


 


(9,888


)




Comprehensive income


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


99,224


 




Dividends ($0.60 per common share)


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(84,012


)


(84,012


)




Issuance of common stock pursuant to team member
  stock plans


 


1,040


 


17,206


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


17,206


 




Retirement of treasury stock


 


—


 


—


 


199,961


 


—


 


(199,961


)


—


 




Excess tax benefit related to exercise of team
  member stock options


 


—


 


6,083


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


6,083


 




Share-based payment expense


 


—


 


10,505


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


10,505


 




Cumulative effect of new accounting standard
  adoption


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(1,288


)


(1,288


)




Other


 


6


 


(498


)


—


 


—


 


—


 


(498


)




Balances at September 28, 2008


 


140,286


 


1,266,141


 


—


 


422


 


239,461


 


1,506,024


 




Net income


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


146,804


 


146,804


 




Foreign currency translation adjustments


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(8,748


)


—


 


(8,748


)




Reclassification adjustments for amounts included
  in income, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


8,440


 


—


 


8,440


 




Change in unrealized losses, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(13,481


)


—


 


(13,481


)




Comprehensive income


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


133,015


 




Redeemable preferred stock dividends


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(28,050


)


(28,050


)




Issuance of common stock pursuant to team member
  stock plans


 


256


 


4,286


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


4,286


 




Excess tax benefit related to exercise of team
  member stock options


 


—


 


54


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


54


 




Share-based payment expense


 


—


 


12,795


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


12,795


 




Other


 


—


 


(248


)


—


 


—


 


—


 


(248


)




Balances at September 27, 2009


 


140,542


 


1,283,028


 


—


 


(13,367


)


358,215


 


1,627,876


 




Net income


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


245,833


 


245,833


 




Foreign currency translation adjustments


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


1,564


 


—


 


1,564


 




Reclassification adjustments for amounts included
  in income, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


12,943


 


—


 


12,943


 




Change in unrealized losses, net of income taxes


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(349


)


—


 


(349


)




Comprehensive income


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


259,991


 




Redeemable preferred stock dividends


 


358


 


5,195


 


—


 


—


 


(5,478


)


(283


)




Conversion of preferred stock


 


29,311


 


413,052


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


413,052


 




Issuance of common stock pursuant to team member
  stock plans


 


1,822


 


47,020


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


47,020


 




Excess tax benefit related to exercise of team
  member stock options


 


—


 


2,708


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


2,708


 




Share-based payment expense


 


—


 


22,894


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


22,894


 




Balances at September 26, 2010


 


172,033


 


$


1,773,897


 


$


—


 


$


791


 


$


598,570


 


$


2,373,258


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
 
34





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(In
thousands)
Fiscal
years ended September 26, 2010, September 27, 2009 and September 28,
2008
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Cash flows from operating
  activities


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Net income


 


$


245,833


 


$


146,804


 


$


114,524


 




Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash
  provided by operating activities:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Depreciation and amortization


 


275,589


 


266,695


 


249,213


 




Loss (gain) on disposition of fixed assets


 


(170


)


3,012


 


3,754


 




Impairment of long-lived assets


 


2,237


 


24,508


 


9,195


 




Share-based payment expense


 


22,894


 


12,795


 


10,505


 




LIFO expense (benefit)


 


(7,670


)


(5,598


)


12,683


 




Deferred income tax expense (benefit)


 


(33,534


)


14,076


 


(9,993


)




Excess tax benefit related to exercise of team
  member stock options


 


(2,982


)


(42


)


(5,686


)




Deferred lease liabilities


 


39,636


 


48,029


 


44,167


 




Other


 


(2,371


)


2,800


 


(65


)




Net change in current assets and liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Accounts receivable


 


(28,447


)


10,408


 


(10,468


)




Merchandise inventories


 


(3,048


)


21,732


 


(52,630


)




Prepaid expenses and other current assets


 


(1,640


)


21,415


 


(27,833


)




Accounts payable


 


23,454


 


6,527


 


(45,378


)




Accrued payroll, bonus and other benefits due team
  members


 


36,133


 


11,985


 


14,413


 




Other current liabilities


 


20,030


 


14,696


 


14,350


 




Net change in other long-term liabilities


 


(659


)


(12,121


)


14,241


 




Net cash provided by operating activities


 


585,285


 


587,721


 


334,992


 




Cash flows from investing
  activities


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Development costs of new locations


 


(171,379


)


(247,999


)


(357,520


)




Other property and equipment expenditures


 


(85,414


)


(66,616


)


(171,952


)




Purchase of available-for-sale securities


 


(1,072,243


)


—


 


(194,316


)




Sale of available-for-sale securities


 


646,594


 


—


 


194,316


 




Decrease (increase) in restricted cash


 


(15,779


)


(70,406


)


1,693


 




Payment for purchase of acquired entities, net of
  cash acquired


 


(14,470


)


—


 


(5,480


)




Proceeds received from divestiture, net


 


—


 


—


 


163,913


 




Other investing activities


 


(2,715


)


(1,262


)


(3,375


)




Net cash used in investing activities


 


(715,406


)


(386,283


)


(372,721


)




Cash flows from financing
  activities


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Common stock dividends paid


 


—


 


—


 


(109,072


)




Preferred stock dividends paid


 


(8,500


)


(19,833


)


—


 




Issuance of common stock


 


46,962


 


4,286


 


18,019


 




Excess tax benefit related to exercise of team
  member stock options


 


2,982


 


42


 


5,686


 




Proceeds from issuance of redeemable preferred
  stock, net


 


—


 


413,052


 


—


 




Proceeds from long-term borrowings


 


—


 


123,000


 


317,000


 




Payments on long-term debt and capital lease
  obligations


 


(210,350


)


(318,370


)


(161,151


)




Other financing activities


 


—


 


(2,722


)


(652


)




Net cash provided by (used in) financing
  activities


 


(168,906


)


199,455


 


69,830


 




Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash
  equivalents


 


893


 


(1,297


)


(1,567


)




Net change in cash and cash equivalents


 


(298,134


)


399,596


 


30,534


 




Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year


 


430,130


 


30,534


 


—


 




Cash and cash equivalents at end of year


 


$


131,996


 


$


430,130


 


$


30,534


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Interest paid


 


$


39,156


 


$


43,685


 


$


36,155


 




Federal and state income taxes paid


 


$


193,044


 


$


69,701


 


$


118,366


 




Non-cash transaction:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Conversion of redeemable preferred stock into
  common stock


 


$


418,247


 


$


—


 


$


—


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated
financial statements.
 
35





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Fiscal
years ended September 26, 2010, September 27, 2009 and September 28,
2008
 
(1) Description of Business
 
Whole
Foods Market, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively “Whole
Foods Market,” “Company,” or “We”) own and operate the largest chain of natural
and organic foods supermarkets. Our Company mission is to promote vitality and
well-being for all individuals by supplying the highest quality, most wholesome
foods available. Through our growth, we have had a significant and positive
impact on the natural and organic foods movement throughout the United States,
helping lead the industry to nationwide acceptance over the last 30 years. As
of September 26, 2010, we operated 299 stores: 288 stores in 38 U.S.
states and the District of Columbia; six stores in Canada; and five stores in
the United Kingdom.
 
The
Company has one operating segment and a single reportable segment, natural and
organic foods supermarkets. The following is a summary of annual percentage
sales and net long-lived assets by geographic area:
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Sales:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




United States


 


97.0


%


97.2


%


96.5


%




Canada and United Kingdom


 


3.0


%


2.8


%


3.5


%




Total sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%




Long-lived assets, net:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




United States


 


96.6


%


96.5


%


96.4


%




Canada and United Kingdom


 


3.4


%


3.5


%


3.6


%




Total long-lived assets, net


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
The
following is a summary of annual percentage sales by product category:
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Grocery


 


33.5


%


33.8


%


33.2


%




Prepared foods


 


18.8


%


19.1


%


19.3


%




Other perishables


 


47.7


%


47.1


%


47.5


%




Total sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
(2) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
 
Definition of Fiscal Year
 
We
report our results of operations on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the
last Sunday in September. Fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 were 52-week years.
 
Principles of Consolidation
 
The
accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance
with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. All significant
majority-owned subsidiaries are consolidated on a line-by-line basis, and all
significant intercompany accounts and transactions are eliminated upon
consolidation.
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents
 
We
consider all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of 90 days or
less to be cash equivalents.
 
Investments
 
We
classify as available-for-sale our cash equivalent investments, restricted cash
investments, and our investments in debt and equity securities that have
readily determinable fair values. Available-for-sale investments are recorded
at fair value. Unrealized holding gains and losses, net of the related tax
effect, on available-for-sale investments are excluded from earnings and are
reported as a separate component of shareholders’ equity until realized. A
decline in the fair value of any available-for-sale security below cost that is
deemed to be other-than-temporary for a period greater than two fiscal quarters
results in a reduction of the carrying amount to fair value. The impairment is
charged to earnings and a new cost basis of the security is established. Cost
basis is established and maintained utilizing the specific identification
method.
 
Restricted Cash
 
Restricted
cash primarily relates to cash held as collateral to support a portion of our
projected workers’ compensation obligations.
 
36





Table of
Contents
 
Inventories
 
We
value our inventories at the lower of cost or market. Cost was determined using
the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method for approximately 93.9% and 93.6% of
inventories in fiscal years 2010 and 2009, respectively. Under the LIFO method,
the cost assigned to items sold is based on the cost of the most recent items
purchased. As a result, the costs of the first items purchased remain in
inventory and are used to value ending inventory. The excess of estimated
current costs over LIFO carrying value, or LIFO reserve, was approximately
$19.4 million and $27.1 million at September 26, 2010 and September 27,
2009, respectively. Costs for remaining inventories are determined by the
first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method.
 
Cost
is determined using the item cost method and the retail method for inventories.
The item cost method involves counting each item in inventory, assigning costs
to each of these items based on the actual purchase cost (net of vendor
allowances) of each item and recording the actual cost of items sold. The item
cost method of accounting enables management to more precisely manage inventory
and purchasing levels when compared to the retail method of accounting. Under
the retail method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the resulting gross
margins are determined by counting each item in inventory, then applying a
cost-to-retail ratio for various groupings of similar items to the retail value
of inventories. Inherent in the retail inventory method calculations are
certain management judgments and estimates which could impact the ending
inventory valuation at cost as well as the resulting gross margins.
 
Our
largest supplier, United Natural Foods, Inc., accounted for approximately
27%, 28% and 32% of our total purchases in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively.
 
Property and Equipment
 
Property
and equipment is stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and
amortization. We provide depreciation of equipment over the estimated useful
lives (generally 3 to 15 years) using the straight-line method. We provide
amortization of leasehold improvements and real estate assets under capital
leases on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the estimated useful lives
of the improvements or the terms of the related leases. Terms of leases used in
the determination of estimated useful lives may include renewal periods at the
Company’s option if exercise of the option is determined to be reasonably
assured. We provide depreciation of buildings over the estimated useful lives
(generally 20 to 30 years) using the straight-line method. Costs related to a
projected site determined to be unsatisfactory and general site selection costs
that cannot be identified with a specific store location are charged to
operations currently. The Company recognizes a liability for the fair value of
a conditional asset retirement obligation when the obligation is incurred.
Repair and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred. Interest costs on
significant projects constructed or developed for the Company’s own use are
capitalized as a separate component of the asset. Upon retirement or disposal
of assets, the cost and related accumulated depreciation are removed from the
balance sheet and any gain or loss is reflected in earnings.
 
Operating Leases
 
The
Company leases stores, non-retail facilities and administrative offices under
operating leases. Store lease agreements generally include rent holidays, rent
escalation clauses and contingent rent provisions for percentage of sales in
excess of specified levels. Most of our lease agreements include renewal
periods at the Company’s option. We recognize rent holiday periods and
scheduled rent increases on a straight-line basis over the lease term beginning
with the date the Company takes possession of the leased space for construction
and other purposes. We record tenant improvement allowances and rent holidays
as deferred rent liabilities, and amortize the deferred rent over the terms of
the lease to rent. We record rent liabilities for contingent percentage of
sales lease provisions when we determine that it is probable that the specified
levels as defined by the lease will be reached.
 
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
 
Goodwill
consists of the excess of cost of acquired enterprises over the sum of the
amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired less liabilities assumed.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually at the beginning of the Company’s
fourth fiscal quarter, or more frequently if impairment indicators arise, on a
reporting unit level. We allocate goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill
impairment testing. We compare our fair value, which is determined utilizing
both a market value method and discounted projected future cash flows, to our
carrying value for the purpose of identifying impairment. Our annual impairment
review requires extensive use of accounting judgment and financial estimates.
 
Intangible
assets include acquired leasehold rights, favorable lease assets, trade names,
brand names, liquor licenses, license agreements, non-competition agreements,
and debt issuance costs. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for
impairment quarterly, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
the carrying amount of an intangible asset may not be recoverable. We amortize
definite-lived intangible assets on a straight-line basis over the life of the
related agreement. Currently, the weighted average life is approximately 16
years for contract-based intangible assets, and approximately 4 years for
marketing-related and other identifiable intangible assets.
 
37





Table of Contents
 
In
fiscal year 2010, the Company adopted amendments to the Financial Accounting
Standards Board (“FASB”) guidance on Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”)
350, “Intangibles — Goodwill and Other.” These provisions amend the factors
that should be considered in developing renewal or extension assumptions used
to determine the useful life of a recognized intangible asset. The intent of
the position is to improve the consistency between the determination of the
useful life of a recognized intangible asset and the period of expected cash
flows used to measure the fair value of the asset. The adoption of these
provisions had no impact on our consolidated financial statements.
 
Business Combinations
 
In
fiscal year 2010, the Company adopted new guidance within ASC 805, “Business
Combinations,” which replaced previous guidance in that Topic and applies to
all transactions or other events in which an entity obtains control of one or
more businesses, including those sometimes referred to as “true mergers” or “mergers
of equals,” and combinations achieved without the transfer of consideration.
The new provisions establish principles and requirements for how the acquirer
recognizes and measures identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed, any
noncontrolling interest and goodwill acquired, and also provide for disclosures
to enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and
financial effects of the business combination. Additional amendments address
the recognition and initial measurement, subsequent measurement, and disclosure
of assets and liabilities arising from contingencies acquired as part of a
business combination. The guidance was applied prospectively on business
combinations during fiscal year 2010 and did not have an impact on our
consolidated financial statements.
 
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Long-Lived Assets to be
Disposed of
 
We
evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances, such as unplanned negative cash flow or short lease life,
indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the
carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted cash flows expected to be
generated by the asset. If such assets are determined to be impaired, the
impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying
amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be
disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less
costs to sell. When the Company impairs assets related to an operating
location, a charge to write down the related assets is included in the “Direct
store expenses” line item on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. When
the Company commits to relocate, close, or dispose of a location, a charge to
write down the related assets to their estimated recoverable value is included
in the “Relocation, store closure and lease termination costs” line item on the
Consolidated Statements of Operations.
 
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
 
The
Company records its financial assets and liabilities at fair value in
accordance with the framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted
accounting principles. This framework establishes a fair value hierarchy that
prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value:
 
·                  Level 1:
Observable inputs that reflect unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or
liabilities traded in active markets.
·                  Level 2: Inputs
other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the
asset or liability, either directly or indirectly.
·                  Level 3: Inputs
that are generally unobservable. These inputs may be used with internally
developed methodologies that result in management’s best estimate of fair
value.
 
The
Company holds money market fund investments that are classified as cash
equivalents or restricted cash and available-for-sale securities generally
consisting of state and local government obligations that are measured at fair
value on a recurring basis based on quoted prices in active markets for
identical assets. Investments are stated at fair value, based on quoted prices
in active markets for identical assets, with unrealized gains and losses
included as a component of shareholders’ equity until realized. The carrying
amount of the Company’s interest rate swap agreement is measured at fair value
on a recurring basis using a standard valuation model that incorporates inputs
other than quoted prices that are observable, including interest rate curves.
Declines in fair value below the Company’s carrying value deemed to be
other-than-temporary are charged against net earnings.
 
The
carrying amounts of trade and other accounts receivable, trade accounts
payable, accrued payroll, bonuses and team member benefits, and other accrued
expenses approximate fair value because of the short maturity of those
instruments. Store closure reserves and estimated workers’ compensation claims
are recorded at net present value to approximate fair value. The carrying
amount of our five-year term loan approximates fair value because it has a
variable interest rate which reflects market changes to interest rates and
contains variable risk premiums based on the Company’s corporate ratings.
 
Effective
September 28, 2009, the Company adopted the provisions of ASC 820, “Fair
Value Measurements and Disclosures,” for nonfinancial assets and liabilities.
Specifically, the Company measures certain property and equipment and
 
38





Table of Contents
 
intangible
assets at fair value resulting from impairment as applicable. The fair value is
determined using management’s best estimate based on a discounted cash flow
model based on future store operating results using internal projections. When
the Company determines assets related to an operating location are impaired, a
charge to write down the related assets to fair value is included in the “Direct
store expenses” line item on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. When
the Company commits to relocate, close, or dispose of a location, a charge to
write down the related assets is included in the “Relocation, store closure and
lease termination costs” line item on the Consolidated Statements of
Operations.
 
Effective
January 18, 2010, the Company adopted the provisions of Accounting
Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2010-06, “Improving Disclosures about Fair
Value Measurements.” Specifically, the Company updated the determination of a
class of assets or liabilities for which separate fair value measurement should
be disclosed and the need to disclose valuation techniques used to measure both
recurring and nonrecurring Level 2 or Level 3 fair value measurements, based on
clarified guidance. Expanded disclosures related to significant transfers in
and out of Level 1 and Level 2, and the requirement related to the presentation
of the Level 3 reconciliation, were not applicable to the Company during fiscal
year 2010 as we had no transfers in valuation levels or Level 3 financial
assets and liabilities.
 
Derivative Instruments
 
The
Company utilizes derivative financial instruments to hedge its exposure to
changes in interest rates. All derivative financial instruments are recorded on
the balance sheet at their respective fair value. The Company does not use
financial instruments or derivatives for any trading or other speculative
purposes. Hedge effectiveness is measured by comparing the change in fair value
of the hedged item with the change in fair value of the derivative instrument.
The effective portion of the gain or loss of the hedge is recorded on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets under the caption “Accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss).” Any ineffective portion of the hedge, as well as amounts not
included in the assessment of effectiveness, is recorded on the Consolidated
Statements of Operations under the caption “Interest expense.”
 
Effective
January 19, 2009, the Company adopted amendments to ASC 815, “Derivatives
and Hedging,” that establishes, among other things, the disclosure requirements
for derivative instruments and hedging activities. The guidance requires
qualitative disclosures about objectives and strategies for using derivatives,
quantitative disclosures about fair value amounts of gains and losses on
derivative instruments, and disclosures about credit-risk-related contingent
features in derivative agreements.
 
Effective
July 5, 2010, the Company adopted the provisions of ASU No. 2010-11, “Scope
Exceptions Related to Embedded Credit Derivatives,” which amends ASC 815, “Derivatives
and Hedging.” The amended guidance clarifies the scope exception for embedded
credit derivative features related to the transfer of credit risk in the form
of subordination of one financial instrument to another. The amendments address
how to determine which embedded credit derivative features, including those in
collateralized debt obligations and synthetic collateralized debt obligations,
are considered to be embedded derivatives that should not be analyzed for
potential bifurcation and separate accounting as well as under which
circumstances embedded credit derivative features would not qualify for the
scope exception and would be subject to potential bifurcation and separate
accounting. The adoption of this provision did not affect our consolidated
financial statements.
 
Insurance and Self-Insurance Reserves
 
The
Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for
the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability,
property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle
liability, and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the
risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering
historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other
actuarial assumptions. The Company had insurance liabilities totaling
approximately $101.1 million and $86.9 million at September 26, 2010 and September 27,
2009, respectively, included in the “Other current liabilities” line item on
the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 
Reserves for Closed Properties
 
The
Company maintains reserves for retail stores and other properties that are no
longer being utilized in current operations. The Company provides for closed
property operating lease liabilities using a present value of the remaining
noncancelable lease payments and lease termination fees after the closing date,
net of estimated subtenant income. The closed property lease liabilities are
expected to be paid over the remaining lease terms, which generally range from
1 to 19 years. The Company estimates subtenant income and future cash flows
based on the Company’s experience and knowledge of the area in which the closed
property is located, the Company’s previous efforts to dispose of similar
assets and existing economic conditions.
 
The
reserves for closed properties include management’s estimates for lease
subsidies, lease terminations and future payments on exited real estate.
Adjustments to closed property reserves primarily relate to changes in existing
economic conditions, subtenant income or actual exit costs differing from
original estimates. Adjustments are made for changes in estimates in the period
in which the changes become known.
 
39





Table of Contents
 
Capital
lease properties that are closed are reduced to their estimated fair value.
Reduction in the carrying values of property, equipment and leasehold
improvements are recognized when expected net future cash flows are less than
the assets’ carrying value. The Company estimates net future cash flows based
on its experience and knowledge of the area in which the closed property is
located and, when necessary, utilizes local real estate brokers.
 
Revenue Recognition
 
We
recognize revenue for sales of our products at the point of sale. Discounts
provided to customers at the point of sale are recognized as a reduction in
sales as the products are sold. Sales taxes are not included in revenue.
 
Cost of Goods Sold and Occupancy Costs
 
Cost
of goods sold includes cost of inventory sold during the period, net of
discounts and allowances, distribution and food preparation costs, and shipping
and handling costs. The Company receives various rebates from third party
vendors in the form of purchase or sales volume discounts and payments under
cooperative advertising agreements. Purchase volume discounts are calculated
based on actual purchase volumes. Volume discounts and cooperative advertising
discounts in excess of identifiable advertising costs are recognized as a
reduction of cost of goods sold when the related merchandise is sold. Occupancy
costs include store rental costs, property taxes, utility costs, repair and
maintenance costs, and property insurance.
 
Direct Store Expenses
 
Direct
store expenses consist of store-level expenses such as salaries and benefits
costs, supplies, depreciation, community marketing and other store-specific
costs. Advertising and marketing expense for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008
was approximately $37.9 million, $32.9 million and $39.7 million, respectively.
Advertising costs are charged to expense as incurred.
 
General and Administrative Expenses
 
General
and administrative expenses consist of salaries and benefits costs, occupancy
and other related costs associated with corporate and regional administrative
support services.
 
Pre-opening Expenses
 
Pre-opening
expenses include rent expense incurred during construction of new stores and
costs related to new store openings, including costs associated with hiring and
training personnel, smallwares, supplies and other miscellaneous costs. Rent
expense is generally incurred approximately 11 months prior to a store’s
opening date. Other pre-opening expenses are incurred primarily in the 30 days
prior to a new store opening. Pre-opening costs are expensed as incurred.
 
Relocation, Store Closure and Lease Termination Costs
 
Relocation
costs consist of moving costs, estimated remaining net lease payments,
accelerated depreciation costs, related asset impairment, and other costs
associated with replaced facilities. Store closure costs consist of estimated
remaining lease payments, accelerated depreciation costs, related asset
impairment, and other costs associated with closed facilities. Lease
termination costs consist of estimated remaining net lease payments for
terminated leases and idle properties, and associated asset impairments.
 
Share-Based Payments
 
The
Company maintains several share-based incentive plans. We grant both options to
purchase common stock and restricted common stock under our Whole Foods Market
2009 Stock Incentive Plan. All options outstanding are governed by the original
terms and conditions of the grants. Options are granted at an option price
equal to the market value of the stock at the grant date and generally vest
ratably over a four- or nine-year period beginning one year from grant date and
have a five, seven, or ten year term. The grant date is established once the
Company’s Board of Directors approves the grant and all key terms have been
determined. The exercise prices of our stock option grants are the closing
price on the grant date. Stock option grant terms and conditions are
communicated to team members within a relatively short period of time. Our
Company generally approves one primary stock option grant annually, occurring
during a trading window. Restricted common stock is granted at the market price
of the stock on the day of grant and generally vests over a three-month period.
 
The
Company uses the Black-Scholes multiple option pricing model which requires
extensive use of accounting judgment and financial estimates, including
estimates of the expected term team members will retain their vested stock
options before exercising them, the estimated volatility of the Company’s
common stock price over the expected term, and the number of options that will
be forfeited prior to the completion of their vesting requirements. The related
share-based payment expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the
vesting period. The tax savings resulting from tax deductions in excess of
expense reflected in the Company’s financial statements are reflected as a
financing cash flow.
 
40





Table of Contents
 
All
full-time team members with a minimum of 400 hours of service may purchase our
common stock through payroll deductions under the Company’s Team Member Stock
Purchase Plan (“TMSPP”). The TMSPP provides for a 5% discount on the shares
purchase date market value which meets the share-based payment, “Safe Harbor”
provisions, and therefore is non-compensatory. As a result, no compensation
expense will be recognized for our employee stock purchase plan.
 
Income Taxes
 
We
recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities by applying statutory tax
rates in effect at the balance sheet date to differences between the book basis
and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and
liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable
income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to
reverse. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted to reflect changes in
tax laws or rates in the period that includes the enactment date. Significant
accounting judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes
and related accruals, deferred tax assets and liabilities. The Company believes
that its tax positions are consistent with applicable tax law, but certain
positions may be challenged by taxing authorities. In the ordinary course of
business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax
outcome is uncertain. In addition, we are subject to periodic audits and
examinations by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other state and local
taxing authorities. Although we believe that our estimates are reasonable,
actual results could differ from these estimates.
 
In
fiscal year 2008, the Company adopted amendments to ASC 740, “Income Taxes,”
which clarify the accounting for uncertainty in tax positions recognized in the
financial statements. Under these provisions, the Company may recognize the tax
benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that
the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities
based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in
the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the
largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon
ultimate settlement. The related amendments also provide guidance on
measurement, classification, interest and penalties associated with tax
positions, and income tax disclosures.
 
Treasury Stock
 
The
Company maintained a stock repurchase program which expired on November 8,
2009. Under that program, the Company could repurchase shares of the Company’s
common stock on the open market that are held in treasury at cost. The
subsequent retirement of treasury stock is recorded as a reduction in retained
earnings at cost. The Company’s common stock has no par value.
 
Earnings per Share
 
Basic
earnings per share is calculated by dividing net income available to common
shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during
the fiscal period. Net income available to common shareholders in fiscal years
2010 and 2009 is calculated using the two-class method, which is an earnings
allocation method for computing earnings per share when an entity’s capital
structure includes common stock and participating securities. The two-class
method determines earnings per share based on dividends declared on common stock
and participating securities (i.e., distributed earnings) and participation
rights of participating securities in any undistributed earnings. The
application of the two-class method is required since the Company’s redeemable
preferred shares contained a participation feature.
 
Diluted
earnings per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding plus, where applicable, the additional common shares that would
have been outstanding as a result of the conversion of convertible debt,
dilutive options, and redeemable preferred stock.
 
During
fiscal year 2010, the Company adopted ASU No. 2009-08, “Earnings per Share
— Amendments to Sections 260-10-S99.” The amended guidance represents technical
changes to ASC 260, “Earnings per Share,” to reflect SEC staff pronouncements
on EITF Topic D-53, “Computation of Earnings Per Share for a Period that
Includes a Redemption or an Induced Conversion of a Portion of a Class of
Preferred Stock,” and EITF Topic D-42, “The Effect of the Calculation of
Earnings per Share for the Redemption or Induced Conversion of Preferred Stock.”
The update consisted principally of formatting changes and removing out-of-date
guidance. The adoption of ASU No. 2009-08 had no impact on our
consolidated financial statements.
 
Comprehensive Income
 
Comprehensive
income consists of net income; unrealized gains and losses on marketable
securities; unrealized gains and losses on cash flow hedge instruments,
including reclassification adjustments of unrealized losses to net income
related to ongoing interest payments; and foreign currency translation
adjustments, net of income taxes. Comprehensive income is reflected in the
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and Comprehensive Income.
 
41





Table of Contents
 
Foreign Currency Translation
 
The
Company’s Canadian and United Kingdom operations use their local currency as
their functional currency. Beginning in fiscal year 2009, foreign currency
transaction gains and losses related to Canadian intercompany operations are
charged to net income in the period incurred. The Company recognized foreign
currency expense totaling approximately $0.2 million and $0.9 million in fiscal
years 2010 and 2009, respectively. Intercompany transaction gains and losses
associated with our United Kingdom operations are excluded from the
determination of net income since these transactions are considered long-term
investments in nature. Assets and liabilities are translated at exchange rates
in effect at the balance sheet date. Income and expense accounts are translated
at the average exchange rates during the year. Resulting translation
adjustments are recorded as a separate component of accumulated other
comprehensive income.
 
Use of Estimates
 
The
preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions
that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of
contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and
revenues and expenses during the period reported. Actual amounts could differ
from those estimates.
 
Reclassifications
 
Where
appropriate, we have reclassified prior years’ financial statements to conform
to current year presentation.
 
(3) Business Combinations
 
Greenlife Grocery
 
On
May 24, 2010, the Company completed the acquisition of certain assets of
Greenlife Grocery, LLC (“Greenlife”) in exchange for approximately $14.5
million in cash plus the assumption of certain liabilities. The assets acquired
are all assets related to two natural foods supermarkets in Chattanooga,
Tennessee, and Asheville, North Carolina. Assets acquired included, but were
not limited to, inventory, fixed assets, and the Greenlife trade name. The
purchase price has been allocated to tangible and identifiable intangible
assets totaling approximately $5.4 million based on their estimated fair values
at the date of acquisition. Total costs in excess of tangible and identifiable
intangible assets acquired of approximately $9.5 million have been recorded as
goodwill. Results of these acquired operations are included in our Consolidated
Statements of Operations for the period beginning May 25, 2010 through September 26,
2010.
 
Wild Oats Markets
 
Effective
August 28, 2007, the Company completed the acquisition of Wild Oats
Markets, Inc. (“Wild Oats”) in a cash tender offer totaling approximately
$565 million plus the assumption of debt. At the date of acquisition, Wild Oats
had 109 stores in 23 states and British Columbia, Canada, operating under four
banners: Wild Oats Marketplace nationwide, Henry’s Farmers Market (“Henry’s”)
in Southern California, Sun Harvest in Texas, and Capers Community Market in
British Columbia. In connection with the acquisition of Wild Oats, the Company
separately entered into an agreement to sell certain assets and liabilities,
consisting primarily of fixed assets, inventories and operating leases, related
to all 35 Henry’s and Sun Harvest stores and a related distribution center in
Riverside, California, to a wholly owned subsidiary of Smart & Final, Inc.,
a Los Angeles-based food retailer, for a final purchase price of approximately
$163.9 million. This sale was completed effective September 30, 2007.
Regarding the other 74 Wild Oats and Capers banner stores the Company acquired
in the Wild Oats Markets transaction, the Company has closed 22 stores,
divested 2 stores as part of the settlement agreement with the Federal Trade
Commission (“FTC”), and currently intends to relocate 2 additional stores in
fiscal year 2011.
 
During
fiscal year 2010, the Company recorded goodwill adjustments of approximately
$2.6 million that related primarily to certain restructuring reserves.
 
(4) FTC Settlement Agreement
 
The
FTC challenged the Company’s August 28, 2007 acquisition of Wild Oats
Markets, Inc. The Company reached a settlement agreement with the FTC and
received final approval of the settlement agreement by the FTC Commissioners on
June 1, 2009, after a 30-day public comment period. Under the terms of the
agreement, a third-party divestiture trustee was appointed to market for sale
until September 8, 2009: leases and related assets for 19 non-operating
former Wild Oats stores; leases and related fixed assets (excluding inventory)
for 12 operating acquired Wild Oats stores and one operating Whole Foods Market
store; and Wild Oats trademarks and other intellectual property associated with
the Wild Oats stores.
 
Pursuant
to the settlement agreement, the divestiture period was extended by the FTC
until March 8, 2010 to allow for good faith offers that were not finalized
for six operating and two non-operating former Wild Oats stores as well as Wild
Oats trademarks and other intellectual property associated with the Wild Oats
stores. At the conclusion of the divestiture period, the divestiture trustee
submitted buyers awaiting FTC approval for a total of two operating and one
non-operating former Wild Oats stores, as well as the Wild Oats trademarks and
intellectual property. The FTC approved the sale of those properties and
related intangible assets on June 18, 2010. These transactions were
completed during the third quarter of fiscal
 
42





Table of Contents
 
year
2010. The 11 remaining operating stores and 18 non-operating stores have been
retained by the Company without further obligation to divest.
 
Pursuant
to the FTC’s approval of the final consent order, the Company recorded
adjustments during the second half of fiscal year 2009 totaling approximately
$4.8 million to measure long-lived assets and certain lease liabilities related
to certain of the operating stores for which sale and transfer of the assets
was determined to be probable or more likely than not at the lower of carrying
amount or fair value less costs to sell. Additionally, the Company recorded
adjustments totaling $3.0 million during fiscal year 2010 to measure the
disposed assets and liabilities at fair value.
 
(5) Investments
 
The
Company had money market fund investments that are classified as short-term
cash equivalent investments and restricted cash investments totaling
approximately $25.8 million and $86.6 million at September 26, 2010,
compared to approximately $439.0 million and $70.4 million at September 27,
2009, respectively.
 
At
September 26, 2010, the Company also had available-for-sale securities,
generally consisting of state and local government obligations totaling
approximately $425.9 million, of which approximately $329.7 million were
classified as short-term. No available-for sale securities were held at September 27,
2009.
 
(6) Fair Value Measurements
 
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring
Basis
 
The
Company held the following financial assets and liabilities at fair value,
based on the hierarchy input levels indicated, on a recurring basis (in thousands):
 



September 26, 2010


 


Level 1 Inputs


 


Level 2 Inputs


 


Level 3 Inputs


 


Total


 




Assets:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Money market fund investments


 


$


112,363


 


$


—


 


$


—


 


$


112,363


 




Marketable securities — available-for-sale


 


425,884


 


—


 


—


 


425,884


 




Total


 


$


538,247


 


$


—


 


$


—


 


$


538,247


 




Liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Interest rate swap


 


$


—


 


$


399


 


$


—


 


$


399


 



 



September 27, 2009


 


Level 1 Inputs


 


Level 2 Inputs


 


Level 3 Inputs


 


Total


 




Assets:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Money market fund investments


 


$


509,395


 


$


—


 


$


—


 


$


509,395


 




Liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Interest rate swap


 


$


—


 


$


20,588


 


$


—


 


$


20,588


 



 
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a
Nonrecurring Basis
 
Fair
value adjustments were included in the following line items on the Consolidated
Statements of Operations for the fiscal years indicated (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Direct store expenses


 


$


1,261


 


$


14,827


 


$


1,492


 




Relocation, store closure and lease termination
  costs


 


976


 


9,681


 


7,703


 




Total impairment of long-lived assets


 


$


2,237


 


$


24,508


 


$


9,195


 



 
The
Company recorded fair value adjustments totaling approximately $2.2 million,
$19.1 million and $6.9 million during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively, reducing the carrying value of related property and equipment to
zero. During fiscal year 2009, total long-lived asset impairment charges also
included approximately $5.3 million related to locations included in the FTC
settlement, reducing the carrying value to fair value. The FTC settlement is
discussed further in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements, “FTC
Settlement Agreement.”
 
43





Table of Contents
 
(7) Property and Equipment
 
Balances
of major classes of property and equipment are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




Land


 


$


48,928


 


$


48,928


 




Buildings and leasehold improvements


 


1,863,259


 


1,687,103


 




Capitalized real estate leases


 


24,874


 


24,874


 




Fixtures and equipment


 


1,240,303


 


1,187,195


 




Construction in progress and equipment not yet in
  service


 


120,845


 


130,068


 




 


 


3,298,209


 


3,078,168


 




Less accumulated depreciation and amortization


 


(1,412,079


)


(1,180,315


)




 


 


$


1,886,130


 


$


1,897,853


 



 
Depreciation
and amortization expense related to property and equipment totaled
approximately $265.1 million, $255.3 million and $233.5 million for fiscal
years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Property and equipment included
accumulated accelerated depreciation and other asset impairments totaling
approximately $7.8 million and $9.6 million at September 26, 2010, and September 27,
2009, respectively. Property and equipment includes approximately $3.8 million,
$5.2 million and $6.0 million of interest capitalized during fiscal years 2010,
2009 and 2008, respectively. Development costs of new locations totaled
approximately $171.4 million, $248.0 million and $357.5 million in fiscal years
2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Construction accruals related to development
sites, remodels, and expansions were included in the “Other current liabilities”
line item on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and totaled approximately $29.9
million and $35.2 million at September 26, 2010, and September 27,
2009, respectively. Additionally, the Company also held approximately $1.5 million
and $4.8 million, net of accumulated depreciation, related to certain land and
buildings held for sale as of September 26, 2010 and September 27,
2009, respectively, in the “Prepaid expenses and other current assets” line
item on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. During fiscal year 2010, the Company
recorded a gain of approximately $3.2 million related to the sale of a
non-operating property, which was included in the “Relocation, store closure
and lease termination costs” line item on the Consolidated Statements of
Operations. Subsequent to year-end, the Company sold certain fixtures and
equipment at carrying value, totaling approximately $1.5 million.
 
(8) Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
 
There
were no impairments of goodwill during fiscal years 2010, 2009 or 2008. The
Company recorded goodwill adjustments of approximately $2.6 million, related to
certain restructuring reserves, and approximately $1.3 million related
primarily to certain restructuring reserves and certain tax liabilities during
fiscal years 2010 and 2009, respectively. Additionally, during fiscal year
2010, the Company recorded goodwill totaling approximately $9.5 million in
connection with the Greenlife acquisition.
 
The
components of intangible assets were as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




 


 


Gross carrying


 


Accumulated


 


Gross carrying


 


Accumulated


 




 


 


amount


 


amortization


 


amount


 


amortization


 




Indefinite-lived contract-based


 


$


1,643


 


$


—


 


$


1,566


 


$


—


 




Definite-lived contract-based


 


96,821


 


(30,706


)


96,515


 


(25,105


)




Definite-lived marketing-related and other


 


1,574


 


(268


)


225


 


(166


)




 


 


$


100,038


 


$


(30,974


)


$


98,306


 


$


(25,271


)



 
We
acquired definite-lived intangible assets totaling approximately $1.9 million,
consisting primarily of license agreements and acquired leasehold rights, and
approximately $1.6 million, consisting primarily of acquired leasehold rights,
during fiscal years 2010 and 2009, respectively. Amortization associated with
intangible assets totaled approximately $6.0 million, $7.9 million and $12.9
million during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
 
Future
amortization associated with the net carrying amount of intangible assets is
estimated to be approximately as follows (in thousands):
 



Fiscal year 2011


 


$


6,076


 




Fiscal year 2012


 


6,025


 




Fiscal year 2013


 


5,138


 




Fiscal year 2014


 


5,005


 




Fiscal year 2015


 


4,692


 




Future fiscal years


 


40,485


 




 


 


$


67,421


 



 
44





Table of Contents
 
(9) Reserves for Closed Properties
 
Following
is a summary of store closure reserve activity during the fiscal years indicated
(in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




Beginning balance


 


$


69,228


 


$


69,269


 




Additions


 


5,236


 


8,276


 




Usage


 


(19,431


)


(17,841


)




Adjustments


 


4,265


 


9,524


 




Ending Balance


 


$


59,298


 


$


69,228


 



 
Additions
to store closure reserves relate to the accretion of interest on existing
reserves and new closures. There were no additions to the store closure reserve
related to new closures in fiscal year 2010. During fiscal year 2009, the
Company recorded reserves totaling approximately $2.7 million related to five
new closures. Usage included approximately $6.6 million and $4.2 million in
termination fees related to certain idle properties, and approximately $12.8
million and $13.7 million in ongoing cash rental payments during fiscal years
2010 and 2009, respectively. During fiscal years 2010 and 2009, the Company
recognized charges of approximately $6.9 million and $12.9 million,
respectively, related to increases in reserves primarily due to changes in
certain subtenant income estimates related to the continued depression in the
commercial real estate market, which are included on the accompanying
Consolidated Statements of Operations under the caption “Relocation, store
closure and lease termination costs.” Additionally, the Company recorded
goodwill adjustments of approximately $2.6 million during fiscal years 2010 and
2009.
 
(10) Long-Term Debt
 
We
have long-term debt and obligations under capital leases as follows (in
thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




Obligations under capital lease agreements, due in
  monthly installments through 2029


 


$


18,299


 


$


18,649


 




Cash flow hedge instrument


 


399


 


20,588


 




Term loan


 


490,000


 


700,000


 




Total long-term debt and capital lease obligations


 


508,698


 


739,237


 




Less current installments


 


410


 


389


 




Long-term debt and capital lease obligations, less
  current installments


 


$


508,288


 


$


738,848


 



 
During
fiscal year 2007, the Company entered into a $700 million, five-year term loan
agreement to finance the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. During the third
quarter of fiscal year 2010, the Company repaid the $210 million portion of the
term loan that was not subject to an interest rate swap agreement. At September 26,
2010, the Company had outstanding $490 million under this agreement. Subsequent
to year-end, the Company repaid an additional $100 million on the term loan,
bringing the current outstanding to $390 million. The loan, which is secured by
a pledge of substantially all of the stock in our subsidiaries, bears interest
at our option of the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin,
currently 0.5%, or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, currently 1.5%, based on
the Company’s Moody’s and S&P rating. The interest period on LIBOR
borrowings may range from one to six months at our option. The participating
banks obtained security interests in certain of the Company’s assets to
collateralize amounts outstanding under the term loan in the first quarter of
fiscal year 2009. The term loan agreement contains certain affirmative
covenants including maintenance of certain financial ratios and certain
negative covenants including limitations on additional indebtedness and
payments as defined in the agreement. At September 26, 2010, we were in
compliance with all applicable debt covenants.
 
The
Company also has outstanding a $350 million revolving line of credit, which is
secured by a pledge of substantially all of the stock in our subsidiaries, that
extends to 2012. The credit agreement contains certain affirmative covenants
including maintenance of certain financial ratios and certain negative
covenants including limitations on additional indebtedness and payments as
defined in the agreement. At September 26, 2010, we were in compliance
with all applicable debt covenants. All outstanding amounts borrowed under this
agreement bear interest at our option of the ABR plus an applicable margin,
currently 0.625%, or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, currently 1.625%, based
on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P rating. The participating banks obtained
security interests in certain of the Company’s assets to collateralize amounts
outstanding under the revolving credit facility in the first quarter of fiscal
year 2009. Commitment fees on the undrawn amount, reduced by outstanding
letters of credit, are payable under this agreement. No amounts were drawn
under this agreement at September 26, 2010 and September 27, 2009.
The amount available to the Company under the agreement was effectively reduced
to $342.9 million and $335.2 million by outstanding letters of credit totaling
approximately $7.1 million and $14.8 million at September 26, 2010 and September 27,
2009, respectively.
 
45





Table of
Contents
 
A
summary of applicable interest rates as of the end of fiscal years 2010 and
2009 follows:
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




Term loan agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Variable interest rate, excluding applicable
  margin on non-swap portion of loan


 


0.533


%


0.253


%




Interest rate swap fixed interest rate, excluding
  applicable margin


 


4.718


%


4.718


%




Applicable margin — LIBOR, based on Moody’s and
  S&P ratings


 


1.500


%


1.750


%




Applicable margin — ABR, based on Moody’s and
  S&P ratings


 


0.500


%


0.750


%




 


 


 


 


 


 




Line of credit agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Variable interest rate, excluding applicable
  margin


 


n/a


 


n/a


 




Applicable margin — LIBOR, based on Moody’s and
  S&P ratings


 


1.625


%


1.875


%




Applicable margin — ABR, based on Moody’s and
  S&P ratings


 


0.625


%


0.875


%




Commitment fee on undrawn amount


 


0.325


%


0.375


%



 
The
Company is committed under certain capital leases for rental of certain
equipment, buildings and land. These leases expire or become subject to renewal
clauses at various dates through 2029. 
Lease agreements are discussed further in Note 12 to the consolidated
financial statements, “Leases.”
 
(11) Derivatives
 
During
fiscal year 2008, the Company entered into a three-year interest rate swap
agreement with a notional amount of $490 million to effectively fix the
interest rate on $490 million of the term loan at 4.718%, excluding the
applicable margin and associated fees, to help manage cash flow exposure
related to interest rate fluctuations. The interest rate swap was designated as
a cash flow hedge. Hedge ineffectiveness was not material during fiscal year
2010 or 2009.
 
The
interest rate swap agreement does not contain a credit-risk-related contingent
feature. The carrying amount of the Company’s interest rate swap totaled
approximately $0.4 million and $20.6 million at September 26, 2010 and
September 27, 2009, respectively, and is included on the “Long-term debt and
capital lease obligations, less current installments” line item on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets. These losses are being recognized as an adjustment
to interest expense over the same period in which the interest costs on the
related debt are recognized. During fiscal years 2010 and 2009, the Company
reclassified approximately $21.7 million and $14.4 million, respectively, from
accumulated other comprehensive income related to ongoing interest payments
that was included in the “Interest expense” line item on the Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
 
Subsequent
to year end, the swap agreement expired and the carrying amount was paid. The
interest rate on the Company’s term loan is now determined based on the
agreement described in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements, “Long-Term
Debt.”
 
(12) Leases
 
The
Company is committed under certain capital leases for rental of equipment,
buildings, and land and certain operating leases for rental of facilities and
equipment. These leases expire or become subject to renewal clauses at various
dates from 2011 to 2054. Amortization of equipment under capital lease is
included with depreciation expense.
 
Rental
expense charged to operations under operating leases for fiscal years 2010,
2009 and 2008 totaled approximately $303.5 million, $281.9 million and $257.5
million, respectively.
 
Minimum
rental commitments and sublease rental income required by all noncancelable
leases are approximately as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


Capital


 


Operating


 


Sublease


 




Fiscal year 2011


 


$


2,061


 


$


294,985


 


$


6,999


 




Fiscal year 2012


 


2,059


 


317,357


 


6,402


 




Fiscal year 2013


 


2,110


 


328,350


 


5,742


 




Fiscal year 2014


 


2,097


 


336,972


 


4,900


 




Fiscal year 2015


 


2,165


 


338,840


 


3,909


 




Future fiscal years


 


26,650


 


4,389,988


 


11,825


 




 


 


37,142


 


$


6,006,492


 


$


39,777


 




Less amounts representing interest


 


18,843


 


 


 


 


 




Net present value of capital lease obligations


 


18,299


 


 


 


 


 




Less current installments


 


410


 


 


 


 


 




Long-term capital lease obligations, less current
  installments


 


$


17,889


 


 


 


 


 



 
46





Table of Contents
 
The present values of future minimum obligations for capital leases
shown above are calculated based on interest rates determined at the inception
of the lease, or upon acquisition of the original lease.
 
During
fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, we paid contingent rentals totaling
approximately $9.5 million, $9.4 million and $10.8 million, respectively.
Sublease rental income totaled approximately $7.2 million, $6.3 million and
$5.4 million during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
 
(13) Income Taxes
 
Components
of income tax expense attributable to continuing operations are as follows (in
thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Current federal income tax


 


$


151,349


 


$


64,680


 


$


62,835


 




Current state income tax


 


40,730


 


23,974


 


22,906


 




Current foreign income tax


 


4,172


 


1,536


 


6,758


 




Total current tax


 


196,251


 


90,190


 


92,499


 




Deferred federal income tax


 


(23,695


)


15,347


 


(1,086


)




Deferred state income tax


 


(6,572


)


(1,258


)


(1,589


)




Deferred foreign income tax


 


(36


)


(141


)


2,171


 




Total deferred tax


 


(30,303


)


13,948


 


(504


)




Total income tax expense


 


$


165,948


 


$


104,138


 


$


91,995


 



 
Actual
income tax expense differed from the amount computed by applying statutory
corporate income tax rates to income from continuing operations before income
taxes as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Federal tax based on statutory rates


 


$


144,123


 


$


87,780


 


$


72,282


 




Increase (reduction) in income taxes resulting
  from:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Change in valuation allowance


 


—


 


967


 


—


 




Tax exempt interest


 


(369


)


—


 


(112


)




Share-based compensation


 


(386


)


33


 


(181


)




Deductible state income taxes


 


(11,955


)


(7,951


)


(7,461


)




Tax rate differential relating to foreign
  operations


 


(4,981


)


(3,058


)


(4,953


)




Other, net


 


1,221


 


2,256


 


2,174


 




Total federal taxes


 


127,653


 


80,027


 


61,749


 




State income taxes


 


34,158


 


22,717


 


21,317


 




Foreign income taxes


 


4,137


 


1,394


 


8,929


 




Total income tax expense


 


$


165,948


 


$


104,138


 


$


91,995


 



 
Current
income taxes payable totaled approximately $10.7 million and $7.8 million at
September 26, 2010 and September 27, 2009, respectively.
 
47





Table of Contents
 
The
tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to significant portions of
the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities for continuing operations
are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




Deferred tax assets:


 


 


 


 


 




Compensation-related costs


 


$


88,729


 


$


68,675


 




Insurance-related costs


 


34,849


 


29,968


 




Inventories


 


2,827


 


1,975


 




Lease and other termination accruals


 


24,396


 


28,416


 




Rent differential


 


91,086


 


78,120


 




Deferred taxes associated with unrecognized tax
  benefit


 


3,555


 


4,967


 




Cash flow hedge instrument


 


154


 


7,960


 




Tax basis of fixed assets in excess of book basis


 


7,212


 


7,243


 




Net domestic and international operating loss
  carryforwards


 


16,405


 


13,395


 




Tax credit carryforwards


 


124


 


124


 




Gross deferred tax assets


 


269,337


 


240,843


 




Valuation allowance


 


(24,682


)


(21,707


)




 


 


244,655


 


219,136


 




Deferred tax liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 




Financial basis of fixed assets in excess of tax
  basis


 


(34,862


)


(37,295


)




Capitalized costs expensed for tax purposes


 


(3,885


)


(2,898


)




Other


 


(5,288


)


(186


)




 


 


(44,035


)


(40,379


)




Net deferred tax asset


 


$


200,620


 


$


178,757


 



 
Deferred
taxes for continuing operations have been classified on the Consolidated
Balance Sheets as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




Current assets


 


$


101,464


 


$


87,757


 




Noncurrent assets


 


99,156


 


91,000


 




Net deferred tax asset


 


$


200,620


 


$


178,757


 



 
At
September 26, 2010, the Company had international operating loss carryforwards
totaling approximately $58.5 million, all of which have an indefinite life. The
Company provided a valuation allowance totaling approximately $24.7 million for
deferred tax assets associated with international operating loss carryforwards,
federal credit carryforwards, and deferred tax assets associated with unrecognized
tax benefits, for which management has determined it is more likely than not
that the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Management believes that it
is more likely than not that we will fully realize the remaining domestic
deferred tax assets in the form of future tax deductions based on the nature of
these deductible temporary differences and a history of profitable operations.
 
It
is the Company’s intention to utilize earnings in foreign operations for an
indefinite period of time, or to repatriate such earnings only when
tax-efficient to do so. If these amounts were distributed to the United States,
in the form of dividends or otherwise, the Company would be subject to
additional U.S. income taxes. Determination of the amount of unrecognized
deferred income tax liabilities on these earnings is not practicable because
such liability, if any, is dependent on circumstances existing if and when
remittance occurs.
 
48





Table of Contents
 
At
September 26, 2010, the Company had unrecognized tax benefits totaling
approximately $10.7 million (not including accrued interest and penalties). The
aggregate changes in the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits, which
exclude interest and penalties, for the two years ended September 26,
2010, is as follows (in thousands):
 



Balance at September 29, 2008


 


$


19,912


 




Additions based on tax positions related to the
  current year


 


150


 




Additions for tax positions of prior years


 


3,422


 




Reductions for tax positions of prior years


 


(358


)




Lapse of statute of limitations


 


(255


)




Settlements


 


(9,673


)




Balance at September 27, 2009


 


$


13,198


 




Additions based on tax positions related to the
  current year


 


84


 




Additions for tax positions of prior years


 


1,059


 




Reductions for tax positions of prior years


 


—


 




Lapse of statute of limitations


 


(105


)




Settlements


 


(3,494


)




Balance at September 26, 2010


 


$


10,742


 



 
The
Company’s total gross unrecognized tax benefits are classified in the “Other
long-term liabilities” line item on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. If the
Company were to prevail on all unrecognized tax benefits recorded at September
26, 2010, the total gross unrecognized tax benefit totaling approximately $10.7
million would benefit the Company’s effective tax rate if recognized. In
addition, associated penalties and interest previously recognized would also
benefit the effective tax rate. The Company recognizes accrued interest and
penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within its global operations as
a component of income tax expense. During the fiscal year ended September 26,
2010, we recorded approximately $1.4 million in interest and penalties. The
Company had accrued approximately $4.2 million and $4.9 million for the payment
of interest and penalties at September 26, 2010 and September 27, 2009,
respectively.
 
The
Company and its domestic subsidiaries file income tax returns with federal,
state and local tax authorities within the United States. The Company’s foreign
affiliates file income tax returns in Canada and the United Kingdom. The
Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) of the United States completed its examination
of the Company’s federal tax returns for its fiscal years 2005 and 2006 during
the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2010. The Company has been notified that the
IRS will open an audit covering fiscal years 2007 and 2008. With limited
exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to federal income tax examinations
for fiscal years before 2007 and is no longer subject to state and local income
tax examinations for fiscal years before 2001.
 
Although
timing of the resolution and/or closure of income tax audits is highly
uncertain, the Company believes it is reasonably possible that tax audit
resolutions could reduce its unrecognized tax benefits in the next 12 months.
As of September 26, 2010, the amount of unrecognized tax benefit which is
reasonably possible to result in payment of cash within 12 months, including
interest and penalties, is approximately $5.4 million.
 
(14) Redeemable Preferred Stock
 
During
the first quarter of fiscal year 2009, the Company issued 425,000 shares of
Series A 8% Redeemable, Convertible Exchangeable Participating Preferred Stock,
$0.01 par value per share (“Series A Preferred Stock”) to affiliates of Leonard
Green & Partners, L.P., for approximately $413.1 million, net of
approximately $11.9 million in closing and issuance costs. The Series A
Preferred Stock was classified as temporary shareholders’ equity at September
27, 2009 since the shares were (i) redeemable at the option of the holder and
(ii) had conditions for redemption which are not solely within the control of
the Company. The holders of the Series A Preferred Stock were entitled to an 8%
dividend, payable quarterly on the first day of each calendar quarter in cash.
The Company paid cash dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock totaling $8.5
million and approximately $19.8 million during fiscal years 2010 and 2009, respectively.
 
On
October 23, 2009, the Company announced its intention to call all 425,000
outstanding shares of the Series A Preferred Stock for redemption on November
27, 2009 in accordance with the terms governing such Series A Preferred Stock.
On November 26, 2009, the holders converted all 425,000 outstanding shares of
the Series A Preferred Stock to common stock. The Series A Preferred Stock was
converted to common stock based on the quotient of (i) the liquidation
preference plus accrued dividends and (ii) 1,000, multiplied by the conversion
rate of 68.9655. At the conversion date, the liquidation preference of the
Series A Preferred Stock of $425 million and accrued dividends of approximately
$5.2 million converted into approximately 29.7 million shares of common stock
of the Company.
 
49





Table of Contents
 
(15) Shareholders’ Equity
 
Dividends per Common Share
 
Following is a summary of dividends declared per common share during
fiscal year 2008 (in thousands, except per share amounts):
 



Date of


 


Dividend per


 


Date of


 


Date of


 


Total


 




declaration


 


common share


 


record


 


payment


 


amount


 




November 20, 2007


 


$


0.20


 


January 11, 2008


 


January 22, 2008


 


$


27,901


 




March 10, 2008


 


0.20


 


April 11, 2008


 


April 22, 2008


 


28,041


 




June 11, 2008


 


0.20


 


July 11, 2008


 


July 22, 2008


 


28,057


 

















 
During
the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, the Company’s Board of Directors
suspended the quarterly cash dividend on common shares.
 
Treasury Stock
 
During
fiscal year 2008, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a $100 million
increase in the Company’s stock repurchase program, bringing the total
authorization to $400 million. During fiscal year 2008, the Company retired all
shares held in treasury totaling approximately $200 million. The Company’s
remaining authorization under the stock repurchase program expired during the
first quarter of fiscal year 2010 and was not renewed.
 
Comprehensive Income
 
Our
comprehensive income is comprised of net income; unrealized gains and losses on
investments; unrealized gains and losses on cash flow hedge instruments,
including reclassification adjustments of unrealized losses to net income
related to ongoing interest payments; and foreign currency translation
adjustments, net of income taxes. Comprehensive income, net of related tax
effects, was as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 




Net income


 


$


245,833


 


$


146,804


 




Foreign currency translation adjustment, net


 


1,564


 


(8,748


)




Reclassification adjustments for amount included
  in net income


 


12,943


 


8,440


 




Unrealized losses, net


 


(349


)


(13,481


)




Comprehensive income


 


$


259,991


 


$


133,015


 



 
At
September 27, 2009, accumulated other comprehensive income consisted of
unrealized losses on cash flow hedge instruments of approximately $12.6
million, which were reclassified to net income during fiscal year 2010.
 
(16) Earnings per Share
 
The
computation of basic earnings per share is based on the number of weighted average
common shares outstanding during the period. The computation of diluted
earnings per share for fiscal years 2010 and 2008 include the dilutive effect
of common stock equivalents consisting of incremental common shares deemed
outstanding from the assumed exercise of stock options. Additionally, the
computation of diluted earnings per share for fiscal year 2010 includes the
assumed conversion of Series A Preferred Stock.
 
50





Table of Contents
 
A
reconciliation of the numerators and denominators of the basic and diluted
earnings per share calculations follows (in thousands, except per share
amounts):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Income available to common shareholders
  (numerator for basic earnings per share)


 


$


240,355


 


$


118,754


 


$


114,524


 




Preferred stock dividends


 


5,478


 


—


 


—


 




Adjusted income available to common shareholders
  (numerator for diluted earnings per share)


 


$


245,833


 


$


118,754


 


$


114,524


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Weighted average common shares outstanding
  (denominator for basic earnings per share)


 


166,244


 


140,414


 


139,886


 




Potential common shares outstanding:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Incremental shares from assumed exercise of stock
  options


 


715


 


—


 


125


 




Assumed conversion of preferred stock


 


4,751


 


—


 


—


 




Weighted average common shares outstanding and potential
  additional common shares outstanding (denominator for diluted earnings per
  share)


 


171,710


 


140,414


 


140,011


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings per share


 


$


1.45


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Diluted earnings per share


 


$


1.43


 


$


0.85


 


$


0.82


 



 
The
computation of diluted earnings per share for fiscal year 2010 does not include
options to purchase approximately 13.2 million shares of common stock due to
their antidilutive effect. The computation of diluted earnings per share for
fiscal year 2009 does not include options to purchase approximately 16.5
million shares of common stock or the conversion of Series A Preferred Stock to
approximately 24.1 million shares of common stock due to their antidilutive
effect. The computation of diluted earnings per share for fiscal year 2008 does
not include options to purchase approximately 13.4 million shares of common
stock or approximately 70,000 shares of common stock related to the zero coupon
convertible subordinated debentures at year end due to their antidilutive
effect.
 
(17) Share-Based Payments
 
Total
share-based payment expense before income taxes recognized during fiscal years
2010, 2009 and 2008 was approximately $22.9 million, $12.8 million and $10.5
million, respectively. Share-based payment expense was included in the
following line items on the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the
periods indicated (in thousands):
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


$


862


 


$


439


 


$


233


 




Direct store expenses


 


10,140


 


7,152


 


5,300


 




General and administrative expenses


 


11,892


 


5,204


 


4,972


 




Share-based payment expense before income taxes


 


22,894


 


12,795


 


10,505


 




Income tax benefit


 


(9,170


)


(5,222


)


(4,815


)




Net share-based payment expense


 


$


13,724


 


$


7,573


 


$


5,690


 



 
Stock Options
 
At
September 26, 2010, September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008, approximately
12.7 million, 15.4 million and 4.5 million shares of our common stock, respectively,
were available for future stock incentive grants.
 
51





Table of Contents
 
The
following table summarizes option activity (in thousands, except per share
amounts and contractual lives in years):
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Weighted


 


 


 




 


 


Number


 


Weighted


 


average


 


Aggregate


 




 


 


of options


 


average


 


remaining


 


intrinsic


 




 


 


outstanding


 


exercise price


 


contractual life


 


value


 




Outstanding options at September 30, 2007


 


17,211


 


$


49.80


 


 


 


 


 




Options granted


 


2,249


 


27.59


 


 


 


 


 




Options exercised


 


(973


)


15.73


 


 


 


 


 




Options expired


 


(842


)


55.64


 


 


 


 


 




Options forfeited


 


(215


)


43.18


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding options at September 28, 2008


 


17,430


 


$


48.64


 


 


 


 


 




Options granted


 


2,714


 


18.73


 


 


 


 


 




Options exercised


 


(62


)


25.38


 


 


 


 


 




Options expired


 


(1,506


)


39.46


 


 


 


 


 




Options forfeited


 


(259


)


34.05


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding options at September 27, 2009


 


18,317


 


$


45.24


 


 


 


 


 




Options granted


 


3,136


 


40.78


 


 


 


 


 




Options exercised


 


(1,624


)


27.30


 


 


 


 


 




Options expired


 


(553


)


56.23


 


 


 


 


 




Options forfeited


 


(330


)


29.15


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding options at September 26, 2010


 


18,946


 


$


46.00


 


2.99


 


$


59,984


 




Vested/expected to vest at September 26, 2010


 


18,436


 


$


46.34


 


2.91


 


$


44,353


 




Exercisable options at September 26, 2010


 


12,677


 


$


52.90


 


1.68


 


$


16,139


 



 
The
weighted average fair values of options granted during fiscal years 2010, 2009
and 2008 were $16.59, $7.75 and $6.46, respectively. The aggregate intrinsic
values of stock options at exercise, represented in the table above, was
approximately $13.8 million during fiscal year 2010 and $0.2 million during
fiscal year 2009. As of the end of fiscal years 2010 and 2009, there was
approximately $62.2 million and $34.3 million of unrecognized share-based
payment expense, respectively, related to nonvested stock options, net of
estimated forfeitures, related to approximately 5.8 million and 4.7 million
shares, respectively. We anticipate this expense to be recognized over a weighted
average period of approximately three years.
 
A
summary of options outstanding and exercisable at September 26, 2010 follows
(share amounts in thousands):
 



 


 


 


 


Options Outstanding


 


Options Exercisable


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


Weighted


 


Weighted average


 


 


 


Weighted


 




Range of Exercise Prices


 


Number


 


average


 


remaining


 


Number


 


average


 




From


 


To


 


outstanding


 


exercise price


 


life (in years)


 


exercisable


 


exercise price


 




$


11.12


 


$


27.62


 


4,058


 


$


22.36


 


4.36


 


1,219


 


$


23.95


 




28.03


 


40.83


 


6,322


 


40.16


 


3.97


 


2,894


 


39.59


 




41.05


 


60.74


 


3,598


 


53.56


 


1.56


 


3,596


 


53.56


 




66.81


 


66.81


 


3,885


 


66.81


 


1.94


 


3,885


 


66.81


 




68.96


 


73.14


 


1,083


 


69.00


 


0.61


 


1,083


 


69.00


 




Total


 


 


 


18,946


 


$


46.00


 


2.99


 


12,677


 


$


52.90


 























 
Share-based
payment expense related to vesting stock options recognized during fiscal years
2010, 2009 and 2008 totaled approximately $18.7 million, $13.3 million and
$10.5 million, respectively.
 
The
fair value of stock option grants has been estimated at the date of grant using
the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the following weighted average
assumptions:
 



 


 


2010


 


2009


 


2008


 




Expected dividend yield


 


0.00


%


0.00


%


2.90


%




Risk-free interest rate


 


2.26


%


1.56


%


2.32


%




Expected volatility


 


46.19


%


52.31


%


36.73


%




Expected life, in years


 


4.56


 


3.97


 


3.38


 



 
Risk-free
interest rate is based on the U.S. treasury yield curve on the date of the
grant for the time period equal to the expected term of the grant. Expected
volatility is calculated using a ratio of implied volatility based on the
Newton-Raphson method of bisection, and four or six year historical
volatilities based on the expected life of each tranche of options. The
 
52





Table of Contents
 
Company
determined the use of implied volatility versus historical volatility
represents a more accurate calculation of option fair value. Expected life is
calculated in two tranches based on weighted average percentage of unexpired
options and exercise-after-vesting information over the last five or seven
years. Unvested options are included in the term calculation using the “mid-point
scenario” which assumes that unvested options will be exercised half-way
between vest and expiration date. The assumptions used to calculate the fair
value of options granted are evaluated and revised, as necessary, to reflect
market conditions and experience. In addition to the above valuation
assumptions, the Company estimates an annual forfeiture rate for unvested
options and adjusts fair value expense accordingly. The Company monitors actual
forfeiture experience and adjusts the rate from time to time as necessary.
 
Restricted Stock
 
During
fiscal year 2010 the Company awarded approximately 109,000 shares of restricted
common stock pursuant to the Whole Foods Market 2009 Stock Incentive Plan. Fair
value of the restricted share issuances on grant date totaled approximately
$4.4 million. The stock fully vested and all restrictions lapsed, except for
11,000 shares which remain restricted through November 23, 2010. The Company
recorded approximately $4.2 million of share-based payment expense related to
this transaction during fiscal year 2010, included in the “General and
administrative expenses” line item on the Consolidated Statements of
Operations.
 
Team Member Stock Purchase Plan
 
Under
the Team Member Stock Purchase Plan, we issued approximately 94,000, 194,000
and 68,000 shares in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. At
September 26, 2010, September 27, 2009 and September 28, 2008, approximately
430,000, 502,000 and 218,000 shares of our common stock, respectively, were
available for future issuance.
 
(18) Team Member 401(k) Plan
 
The
Company offers a team member 401(k) plan to all team members with a minimum of
1,000 services hours in one year.  In
fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, the Company made a cash contribution to the
plan of approximately $4.2 million, $3.7 million and $3.0 million,
respectively.
 
(19) Quarterly Results (unaudited)
 
The
Company’s first quarter consists of 16 weeks, the second and third quarters
each are 12 weeks, and the fourth quarter is 12 or 13 weeks. Fiscal years 2010
and 2009 are 52-week years with twelve weeks in the fourth quarter. Because the
first quarter is longer than the remaining quarters, it typically represents a
larger share of our annual sales from existing stores. Quarter to quarter
comparisons of results of operations have been and may be materially impacted
by the timing of new store openings. The Company believes that the following
information reflects all normal recurring adjustments necessary for a fair
presentation of the information for the periods presented. The operating
results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any
future period.
 
The
Company recorded store closure reserve adjustments totaling approximately $10.1
million and $9.7 million during the first quarter of fiscal year 2010 and the
third quarter of fiscal year 2009, respectively, related to changes in certain
subtenant income estimates driven by the outlook for the commercial real estate
market, which was included in the “Relocation, store closure and lease
termination costs” line item on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Additionally, included in that line item during the third quarter of fiscal
year 2010, the Company recorded a gain of approximately $3.2 million related to
the sale of a non-operating property.
 
53





Table of
Contents
 
The
following tables set forth selected quarterly unaudited Consolidated Statements
of Operations information for the fiscal years ended September 26, 2010 and September
27, 2009 (in thousands except per share amounts):
 



 


 


First


 


Second


 


Third


 


Fourth


 




 


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 




Fiscal Year 2010


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Sales


 


$


2,639,158


 


$


2,106,061


 


$


2,163,181


 


$


2,097,394


 




Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


1,732,942


 


1,363,632


 


1,402,847


 


1,370,972


 




Gross profit


 


906,216


 


742,429


 


760,334


 


726,422


 




Direct store expenses


 


702,806


 


551,705


 


567,191


 


554,014


 




General and administrative expenses


 


75,936


 


62,540


 


68,153


 


65,820


 




Pre-opening expenses


 


12,809


 


11,636


 


8,692


 


4,907


 




Relocation, store closure and lease termination
  costs


 


12,412


 


(2,688


)


728


 


765


 




Operating income


 


102,253


 


119,236


 


115,570


 


100,916


 




Interest expense


 


(10,553


)


(7,783


)


(7,421


)


(7,291


)




Investment and other income


 


1,783


 


1,910


 


1,543


 


1,618


 




Income before income taxes


 


93,483


 


113,363


 


109,692


 


95,243


 




Provision for income taxes


 


38,328


 


45,912


 


43,963


 


37,745


 




Net income


 


55,155


 


67,451


 


65,729


 


57,498


 




Preferred stock dividends


 


5,478


 


—


 


—


 


—


 




Income available to common shareholders


 


$


49,677


 


$


67,451


 


$


65,729


 


$


57,498


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings per share


 


$


0.32


 


$


0.39


 


$


0.38


 


$


0.33


 




Diluted earnings per share


 


$


0.32


 


$


0.39


 


$


0.38


 


$


0.33


 



 



 


 


First


 


Second


 


Third


 


Fourth


 




 


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 




Fiscal Year 2009


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Sales


 


$


2,466,503


 


$


1,857,550


 


$


1,878,338


 


$


1,829,229


 




Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs


 


1,643,785


 


1,212,233


 


1,218,029


 


1,203,263


 




Gross profit


 


822,718


 


645,317


 


660,309


 


625,966


 




Direct store expenses


 


653,974


 


500,392


 


499,830


 


491,613


 




General and administrative expenses


 


82,600


 


56,832


 


52,592


 


51,725


 




Pre-opening expenses


 


14,064


 


13,789


 


10,763


 


10,602


 




Relocation, store closure and lease termination
  costs


 


5,077


 


4,651


 


18,209


 


3,248


 




Operating income


 


67,003


 


69,653


 


78,915


 


68,778


 




Interest expense


 


(13,580


)


(7,696


)


(7,688


)


(7,892


)




Investment and other income (loss)


 


1,841


 


(639


)


1,326


 


921


 




Income before income taxes


 


55,264


 


61,318


 


72,553


 


61,807


 




Provision for income taxes


 


22,935


 


26,060


 


29,746


 


25,397


 




Net income


 


32,329


 


35,258


 


42,807


 


36,410


 




Preferred stock dividends


 


4,533


 


7,934


 


7,839


 


7,744


 




Income available to common shareholders


 


$


27,796


 


$


27,324


 


$


34,968


 


$


28,666


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings per share


 


$


0.20


 


$


0.19


 


$


0.25


 


$


0.20


 




Diluted earnings per share


 


$


0.20


 


$


0.19


 


$


0.25


 


$


0.20


 



 
(20) Commitments and Contingencies
 
The
Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for
the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability,
property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle
liability and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the
risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering
historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other
actuarial assumptions. While we believe that our assumptions are appropriate,
the estimated accruals for these liabilities could be significantly affected if
future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical
trends.
 
The
Company has entered into retention agreements with certain members of the
Company’s management pursuant to which: (1) if at any time after a change of
control or March 1, 2012, the management member’s employment is terminated (a)
other than for “cause” (as defined in the agreement) or (b) by the
management member and the management member signs a release, then, subject to
the management member’s continued compliance with the agreement, the management
member will receive a severance payment, immediate vesting of stock options and
reimbursement of COBRA premiums; and (2) if at any
 
54





Table of Contents
 
time
for two years after a change of control, the management member’s
employment is terminated other than for “cause” or the management member’s
death, or the management member terminates employment for “good reason” (as
defined in the agreement), then the management member will be entitled to a
change of control payment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the retention
agreements with Walter Robb, Glenda Flanagan, A.C. Gallo, and Jim Sud provide
that in certain situations the benefits described in clause (1) of the
prior sentence are subject to future negotiation.
 
From
time to time we are a party to legal proceedings including matters involving
personnel and employment issues, personal injury, intellectual property, real
estate and other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. The
Company has established loss provisions for matters in which losses are
probable and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. The Company does
not believe that any of these proceedings arising in the ordinary course of
business, either alone or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect
on the Company’s results of operations, cash flows or financial condition.
Although management does not expect that the outcome in these proceedings will
have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of
operations, litigation is inherently unpredictable. Therefore, we could incur
judgments or enter into settlements of claims that could materially impact our
results.
 
On
October 27, 2008, Whole Foods Market was served with the complaint in Kottaras
v. Whole Foods Market, Inc., a putative class action filed in the United States
District Court for the District of Columbia, seeking treble damages, equitable,
injunctive, and declaratory relief and alleging that the acquisition and merger
between Whole Foods Market and Wild Oats violates various provisions of the
federal antitrust laws. This case is in the preliminary stages. Whole Foods
Market cannot at this time predict the likely outcome of this judicial
proceeding or estimate the amount or range of loss or possible loss that may
arise from it. The Company has not accrued any loss related to the outcome of
this case as of September 26, 2010.
 
(21) Subsequent Events
 
The
Company evaluated subsequent events and transactions for potential recognition
or disclosure in the financial statements through the date the financial
statements were issued.
 
55





Table of Contents
 
Item 9.      Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and
Financial Disclosure.
 
None.
 
Item 9A.   Controls and Procedures.
 
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
 
The
Company’s management, with the participation of the Company’s Co-Chief
Executive Officers and Chief Financial Officer, has evaluated the effectiveness
of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules
13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the “Exchange Act”)) as of the end of the period covered by this report. Based
on such evaluation, the Company’s Co-Chief Executive Officers and Chief
Financial Officer have concluded that, as of the end of such period, the
Company’s disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of the end of
the period covered by this report.
 
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
There
have been no changes in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting
(as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) during the
most recent fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably
likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control over financial
reporting.
 
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial
Reporting
 
The
Company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate
internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rules 13a-15(f)
and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act.
 
Because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
Under
the supervision and with the participation of the Company’s management,
including our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, the
Company conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of its internal control
over financial reporting based on criteria established in the framework in Internal Control — Integrated Framework
issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
Based on this evaluation, the Company’s management concluded that its internal
control over financial reporting was effective as of September 26, 2010.
 
The
Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, Ernst & Young LLP,
audited the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting.
Ernst & Young LLP has issued their attestation report which is included in
Part II, Item 8 of this Report on Form 10-K.
 
Item 9B.   Other Information.
 
Not
applicable.
 
56





Table of Contents
 
PART III
 
Item 10.   Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate
Governance.
 
The
information required by this item about our Company’s Executive Officers is
included in Part I, “Item 1. Business” of this Report on Form 10-K under the
caption “Executive Officers of the Registrant.” All other information required
by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the registrant’s
definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held
February 28, 2011 to be filed with the Commission pursuant to Regulation 14A.
 
The Company has adopted a Code of Conduct and Ethics for Team Members
and Directors pursuant to section 406 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. A copy of our
Code of Conduct and Ethics is publicly available on our Company website at
http://www.wholefoodsmarket.com/company/pdfs/codeofconduct.pdf and the Company
will provide disclosure of future updates by posting them to our website. The
information contained on our website is not incorporated by reference into this
Report on Form 10-K.
 
Item 11.   Executive
Compensation.
 
The
information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the
registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 
Item 12.   Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and
Related Stockholder Matters.
 
The
information required by this item about our Company’s securities authorized for
issuance under equity compensation plans as of September 26, 2010 is included
in Part I, “Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder
Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities” of this Report on Form 10-K.
All other information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference
from the registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of
Shareholders.
 
Item 13.   Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director
Independence.
 
The
information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the
registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 
Item 14.   Principal Accountant Fees and Services.
 
The
information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the
registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 
57





Table of Contents
 
PART IV
 
Item 15.          Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
 



(a)


The
  following documents are filed as part of this report:




 


 


 




 


(1)


Consolidated
  Financial Statements: See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary
  Data.




 


(2)


Financial
  Statement Schedules: No schedules are required.




 


(3)


Exhibits
  are incorporated herein by reference or are filed with this report as
  indicated below.




 


 


 




(b)


Exhibits



 



3.1


Amended
  and Restated Articles of Incorporation of the Registrant, dated March 24,
  2006 (9)




3.2


Articles
  of Amendment to the Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation of the
  Registrant, dated April 13, 2009 (9)




3.3


Amended
  and Restated By-laws of the Registrant adopted August 13, 2008 (5)




3.4


Amended
  and Restated By-laws of the Registrant adopted September 8, 2010, effective
  January 1, 2011 (4)




4.1


Series
  A Preferred Stock Registration Rights Agreement (2)




4.2


Form
  of Series A Preferred Stock Certificate (2)




10.1


1993
  Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (1)




10.2


2007
  Stock Incentive Plan (10)




10.3


Amendment
  No. One to the Whole Foods Market 2007 Stock Incentive Plan (5)




10.4


2009
  Stock Incentive Plan (12)




10.5


2007
  Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (11)




10.6


Form
  of Executive Retention Plan and Non-Compete Arrangement by and between the
  executive leadership team of the Registrant and the Registrant (7)




10.7


Form
  of Director & Officer Indemnification Agreement (3)




10.8


Agreement
  for Distribution of Products by and between Whole Foods Market Distribution,
  Inc. and United Natural Foods, Inc. (Portions of this agreement have been
  omitted pursuant to a request for confidential treatment filed with the
  Securities and Exchange Commission) (8)




10.9


First
  Amendment, dated June 2, 2010, to the Agreement for Distribution of Products
  by and between Whole Foods Market Distribution, Inc. and United Natural
  Foods, Inc. (Portions of this agreement have been omitted pursuant to a
  request for Confidential Treatment filed with the Securities Exchange
  Commission) (7)




10.10


Term
  Loan Agreement dated August 28, 2007 by and among Registrant, Royal Bank of
  Canada; JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.; Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; Wachovia Bank,
  N.A.; LaSalle Bank Midwest, N.A.;  RBC Capital Markets; and J.P. Morgan
  Securities Inc. (Portions of this Agreement have been omitted pursuant to a
  request for Confidential Treatment filed with the Securities and Exchange
  Commission) (6)




10.11


Revolving
  Credit Agreement dated August 28, 2007 by and among Registrant, JPMorgan
  Chase Bank, N.A.; Royal Bank of Canada; Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; J.P. Morgan
  Securities Inc.; and RBC Capital Markets (Portions of this Agreement have
  been omitted pursuant to a request for Confidential Treatment filed with the
  Securities and Exchange Commission) (6)




10.12


First
  Amendment, dated June 2, 2008, of Revolving Credit Agreement dated August 28,
  2007 by and among Registrant, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.; Royal Bank of
  Canada; Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; J.P. Morgan Securities Inc.; and RBC Capital
  Markets (Portions of this Agreement have been omitted pursuant to a request
  for Confidential Treatment filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission)
  (5)




10.13


Securities
  Purchase Agreement dated November 5, 2008, among Whole Foods Market, Inc.,
  Green Equity Investors V, L.P., Green Equity Investors Side V, L.P. and Thyme
  Coinvest, LLC (2)




10.14


Amendment
  No. 1, dated April 12, 2009, to the Securities Purchase Agreement dated
  November 5, 2008, among Whole Foods Market, Inc., Green Equity Investors V,
  L.P., Green Equity Investors Side V, L.P. and Thyme Coinvest, LLC (3)




12.1


Computation
  of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges (13)




21.1


Subsidiaries
  of the Registrant (13)




23.1


Consent
  of Ernst & Young LLP (13)




31.1


Certification
  by Co-Chief Executive Officer pursuant to 17 CFR 240.13a-14(a) (13)




31.2


Certification
  by Co-Chief Executive Officer pursuant to 17 CFR 240.13a-14(a) (13)




31.3


Certification
  by Chief Financial Officer pursuant to 17 CFR 240.13a-14(a) (13)




32.1


Certification
  by Co-Chief Executive Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 (13)




32.2


Certification
  by Co-Chief Executive Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 (13)




32.3


Certification by Chief
  Financial Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 (13)



 
58





Table of Contents
 



101


The following financial
  information from the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, for the period
  ended September 26, 2010, formatted in eXtensible Business Reporting
  Language: (i) Consolidated Balance Sheets, (ii) Consolidated Statements of
  Operations, (iii) Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and
  Comprehensive Income, (iv) Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, (v) Notes
  to Consolidated Financial Statements (13) (14)



 



 


(1)


Filed
  as an exhibit to Registration Statement on Form S-4 (No. 33-63824) and
  incorporated herein by reference.




 


(2)


Filed
  as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 8-K filed December 2, 2008 and
  incorporated herein by reference.




 


(3)


Filed
  as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 8-K filed April 16, 2009 and incorporated
  herein by reference.




 


(4)


Filed
  as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 8-K filed September 10, 2010 and
  incorporated herein by reference.




 


(5)


Filed
  as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-Q for the period ended July 6, 2008
  filed August 15, 2008 and incorporated herein by reference.




 


(6)


Filed
  as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-Q for the period ended April 12, 2009
  filed May 22, 2009 and incorporated herein by reference.




 


(7)


Filed
  as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-Q for the period ended July 4, 2010
  filed August 13, 2010 and incorporated herein by reference.




 


(8)


Filed
  as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-K for the period ended September 24,
  2006 filed December 8, 2006 and incorporated herein by reference.




 


(9)


Filed
  as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-K for the period ended September 27,
  2009 filed November 27, 2009 and incorporated herein by reference.




 


(10)


Filed
  as Appendix B to Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual
  Meeting of Stockholders held March 5, 2007 filed January 22, 2007 and
  incorporated herein by reference.




 


(11)


Filed
  as Appendix C to Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual
  Meeting of Stockholders held March 5, 2007 filed January 22, 2007 and
  incorporated herein by reference.




 


(12)


Filed
  as Appendix A to Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual
  Meeting of Stockholders held March 16, 2009 filed January 26, 2009 and
  incorporated herein by reference.




 


(13)


Filed
  herewith.




 


(14)


Pursuant to Rule 406T of
  Regulation S-T, the Interactive Data Files hereto are deemed not filed or
  part of a registration statement or prospectus for purposes of Sections 11 or
  12 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, are deemed not filed for
  purposes of Section 18 of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as
  amended, and otherwise are not subject to liability under those sections.



 
59





Table of Contents
 
SIGNATURES
 
Pursuant
to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned thereunto duly authorized.
 
WHOLE FOODS MARKET, INC.
 



Date:
  November 24, 2010


By:


/s/
  Glenda Flanagan




 


 


Glenda
  Flanagan




 


 


Executive
  Vice President and Chief Financial Officer



 
Pursuant
to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has
been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in
the capacities indicated on November 24, 2010.
 



Name


 


Title




 


 


 




/s/
  John Mackey


 


 




John
  Mackey


 


Co-Chief
  Executive Officer and Director




 


 


(Principal Executive Officer)




 


 


 




/s/
  Walter Robb


 


 




Walter
  Robb


 


Co-Chief
  Executive Officer and Director




 


 


(Principal Executive Officer)




 


 


 




/s/
  Glenda Flanagan


 


 




Glenda
  Flanagan


 


Executive
  Vice President and Chief Financial Officer




 


 


(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)




 


 


 




/s/
  Dr. John B. Elstrott


 


 




Dr.
  John B. Elstrott


 


Chairman
  of the Board




 


 


 




/s/
  Gabrielle E. Greene


 


 




Gabrielle
  E. Greene


 


Director




 


 


 




/s/
  Shahid M. Hassan


 


 




Shahid
  M. Hassan


 


Director




 


 


 




 


 


 




Stephanie
  Kugelman


 


Director




 


 


 




/s/
  Jonathan A. Seiffer


 


 




Jonathan
  A. Seiffer


 


Director




 


 


 




/s/
  Morris J. Siegel


 


 




Morris
  J. Siegel


 


Director




 


 


 




/s/
  Jonathan D. Sokoloff


 


 




Jonathan
  D. Sokoloff


 


Director




 


 


 




/s/
  Dr. Ralph Z Sorenson


 


 




Dr.
  Ralph Z. Sorenson


 


Director




 


 


 




/s/
  William A. Tindell


 


 




William
  A Tindell


 


Director



 
60





