
10-K
1
a08-29339_110k.htm
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 AND 15(D)


Table of
Contents
 

 

 
UNITED
STATES
SECURITIES
AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON,
D.C.  20549
 
FORM 10-K
 
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF
THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
 
FOR THE
FISCAL YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 28, 2008
 
COMMISSION
FILE NUMBER:  0-19797
 
WHOLE
FOODS MARKET, INC.
(Exact name of
registrant as specified in its charter)
 




Texas


 


74-1989366




(State of
  incorporation)


 


(IRS Employer
  Identification No.)




 
550 Bowie
St.
Austin, Texas 78703
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
Registrant’s
telephone number, including area code:
512-477-4455
 
Securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the Act:
Common Stock, no par value
 
Indicate by check mark if
the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of
the Securities Act.
Yes x  No o
 
Indicate by check mark if
the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of
the Act.
Yes o  No x
 
Indicate by check mark
whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13
or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file
such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days. Yes x  No o
 
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent
filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will
not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K
or any amendment to this Form 10-K. o
 
Indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company (as defined in Rule 12b-2
of the Exchange Act).
 



 


Large accelerated filer
  x


 


Accelerated filer o




 


Non-accelerated filer o
  (Do not check if a smaller reporting company)


 


Smaller reporting
  company o



 
Indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act). Yes o  No x
 
The aggregate market value of all common stock held by
non-affiliates of the registrant as of April 13, 2008 was $4,384,722,829.  The number of shares of the registrant’s
common stock, no par value, outstanding as of November 21, 2008 was
140,318,304.
 
DOCUMENTS
INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
 
The information required by Part III of this
report, to the extent not set forth herein, is incorporated by reference from
the Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of the
Stockholders to be held March 16, 2009.
 

 

 





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Annual Report on Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended September 28,
2008
 
Table of Contents
 



 


 


Page




 


 


Number




 


 


 




PART I


 




 


 


 




Item 1.


Business


3




Item 1A.


Risk Factors


17




Item 1B.


Unresolved
  Staff Comments


22




Item
  2.


Properties


23




Item 3.


Legal Proceedings


23




Item 4.


Submission
  of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders


24




 


 


 




PART II


 




 


 


 




Item 5.


Market for
  Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases
  of Equity Securities


25




Item 6.


Selected
  Financial Data


27




Item 7.


Management’s
  Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations


28




Item 7A.


Quantitative
  and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk


41




Item 8.


Financial
  Statements and Supplementary Data


43




Item 9.


Changes in
  and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure


73




Item 9A.


Controls and
  Procedures


73




Item 9B.


Other Information


73




 


 


 




PART III


 




 


 


 




Item 10.


Directors
  and Executive Officers of the Registrant


74




Item 11.


Executive
  Compensation


74




Item 12.


Security
  Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management


74




Item 13.


Certain
  Relationships and Related Transactions


74




Item 14.


Principal
  Accounting Fees and Services


74




 


 


 




PART IV


 




 


 


 




Item 15.


Exhibits,
  Financial Statement Schedules


75




 


 


 




SIGNATURES


77



 
2





Table of Contents
 
This Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking
statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities and
Exchange Act of 1934 concerning our current expectations, assumptions,
estimates and projections about the future. These forward-looking statements
are based on currently available operating, financial and competitive
information and are subject to
risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ
materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements. See “Item
1A. Risk Factors” for a discussion of risks and uncertainties that may affect
our business.
 
PART I
 
Item 1.    Business.
 
General
 
Whole Foods Market is the
world’s leading supermarket emphasizing natural and organic foods and America’s
first national “Certified Organic” grocer. Our Company mission is to promote the
vitality and well-being of all individuals by supplying the highest quality,
most wholesome foods available. Since the purity of our food and the health of
our bodies are directly related to the purity and health of our environment,
our core mission is devoted to the promotion of organically grown foods, food
safety concerns, and the sustainability of our entire ecosystem. Through our
growth, we have had a significant and positive impact on the natural and
organic foods movement throughout the United States, helping lead the industry
to nationwide acceptance over the last 28 years.
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
is a Texas corporation incorporated in 1980. The Company is based in Austin,
Texas and conducts business through various wholly owned subsidiaries. Unless
otherwise specified, references to Whole Foods Market or the Company in this
Report include its consolidated subsidiaries. We have one operating segment,
supermarkets emphasizing natural and organic foods.
 
We opened our first store
in Austin, Texas in 1980 and completed our initial public offering in January 1992.
As of September 28, 2008, we operated 275 stores: 264 stores in 38 U.S.
states and the District of Columbia; six stores in Canada; and five stores in
the United Kingdom. This includes 55 stores (net of closed and divested
locations) acquired from Wild Oats Markets, Inc. (“Wild Oats”) on August 28,
2007: 52 stores in 20 U.S. states and three stores in Canada.
 
Our sales have grown
rapidly through new store openings, acquisitions and comparable store sales
growth, from approximately $92 million in fiscal year 1991, excluding the
effect of pooling-of-interests transactions completed since 1991, to
approximately $8.0 billion in fiscal year 2008, a compounded annual growth rate
of approximately 30%. We are a Fortune 500 company, ranking number 369 based on
our fiscal year 2007 sales of approximately $6.6 billion. Our 275 stores
average approximately 36,000 square feet in size, approximately $30 million in
annual sales, and are approximately 8.5 years old on average. Our stores are
supported by 11 regional offices and our Austin headquarters, regional
distribution centers, bakehouse facilities, commissary kitchens,
seafood-processing facilities, produce procurement centers, a confectionary,
and a specialty coffee, tea procurement and brewing operation.
 
We aspire to become an
international brand synonymous with not just natural and organic foods, but
also with being the best food retailer in every community in which we are
located. We believe our heavy emphasis on perishable products, along with our
unparalleled customer service, is helping us reach that goal, differentiating
our stores from other supermarkets and enabling us to attract a broad base of
loyal customers. Perishable product sales accounted for approximately 67% of
our total sales in fiscal year 2008. The following is a summary of annual
percentage revenues by product category:
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Grocery


 


33.2


%


32.0


%


31.5


%




Prepared foods


 


19.3


%


19.8


%


19.6


%




Other
  perishables


 


47.5


%


48.3


%


48.8


%




Total sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



Figures may not sum due to rounding.
 
3





Table of
Contents
 
The Natural and Organic Products Industry
 
According to a leading
trade publication for the industry, sales of natural products across all retail
and direct-to-consumer channels grew to approximately $62 billion in 2007, a
10% increase over the prior year. We believe the growth in sales of natural and
organic foods is being driven by numerous factors, including:
 



·


heightened awareness of
  the role that food and nutrition play in long-term health, which has led to
  healthier eating patterns;




 


 




·


a better-educated and
  wealthier populace whose median age is increasing each year;




 


 




·


increasing consumer
  concern over the purity and safety of food due to the presence of pesticide
  residues, growth hormones, artificial ingredients and other chemicals, and
  genetically engineered ingredients; and




 


 




·


environmental concerns
  due to the degradation of water and soil quality.



 
Natural foods can be
defined as foods that are minimally processed, largely or completely free of
artificial ingredients, preservatives and other non-naturally occurring
chemicals and as near to their whole, natural state as possible. Organic foods
are grown through methods intended to support and enhance the earth’s natural
balance. Generally, organic food products are produced using:
 



·


agricultural management
  practices intended to promote and enhance ecosystem health;




 


 




·


no genetically
  engineered seeds or crops, sewage sludge, long-lasting pesticides, herbicides
  or fungicides;




 


 




·


livestock management
  practices intended to promote healthy, humanely treated animals by providing
  organically grown feed, fresh air and outdoor access while using no
  antibiotics or growth hormones; and




 


 




·


food processing
  practices intended to protect the integrity of the organic product and
  disallow irradiation, genetically modified organisms (“GMOs”) or synthetic
  preservatives.



 
Organic Rule
 
In October 2002, the
United States Department of Agriculture’s (“USDA”) Organic Rule was
implemented into Federal law. The Organic Rule was created to address the
rapid, consistent growth of the organics industry over the past 20-plus years
and the need for a set of national organic standards to serve as clear
guidelines as to what is considered organic for the industry and its customers.
Under the Organic Rule, all products labeled as “organic” in any form must be
certified by a USDA-accredited certifying agency. Furthermore, all retailers,
including Whole Foods Market, that handle, store, and sell organic products
must implement measures to protect their organic integrity by:
 



·


preventing the
  commingling of organic and conventional products;




 


 




·


protecting organic
  products from contact with prohibited substances (such as sanitation and pest
  control products);




 


 




·


labeling organic
  products properly and clearly; and




 


 




·


keeping proper records
  with regard to organic handling procedures and vendor relationships.



 
Whole Foods Market played
an active leadership role in the development of the national organic standards.
Margaret Wittenberg, our Global Vice President of Quality Standards and Public
Affairs, served on the National Organic Standards Board (“NOSB”) from 1995 to
2000. The NOSB members were appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture to act as
industry advisors to the USDA’s National Organic Program, developing the standards
and protocols that form the backbone of the USDA’s Organic Rule. As the sole
retail representative on the NOSB, Ms. Wittenberg contributed a broad,
realistic perspective on how the standards could work most effectively at the
retail level.
 
In fiscal year 2008, Ms. Wittenberg
was selected to serve as one of four new members on the Board of Directors for
The Organic Center, a nonprofit organization that advances peer-reviewed
scientific research and information behind the health and environmental benefits
of organic food and farming and communicates those benefits to the public.
 
4





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market has
been devoted to protecting organic integrity for years, and we are pleased to
have the USDA’s Organic Rule as a guiding standard. In May 2003,
Whole Foods Market became America’s first national “Certified Organic” grocer
through certification by a federally recognized independent third-party
certification organization. This voluntary certification tells our customers
that we have gone the extra mile by not only following the USDA’s Organic Rule,
but following a strict set of operating procedures designed to ensure that the
products we sell and label as organic are indeed organic – procedures that are
not specifically required by the Organic Rule.
 
This certification
verifies our handling of organic goods according to stringent national
guidelines, from receipt through re-packing to final sale to customers. To
receive certification, retailers must agree to adhere to a strict set of
standards set forth by the USDA, submit documentation, and open their
facilities to on-site inspections – all designed to assure Americans that the
chain of organic integrity is preserved. The certification is one more example
of our commitment to the promotion of organic agriculture and the integrity of
the certified organic label.
 
Business Strategy
 
Whole Foods Market is the
world’s leading supermarket emphasizing natural and organic foods. We believe
that much of our success to date is because we remain a uniquely mission-driven
Company. We are highly selective about what we sell. We believe in providing an
empowering work environment for our team members, and we are committed to
sustainable agriculture. Our motto, “Whole Foods, Whole People, Whole Planet,”
emphasizes that our vision reaches far beyond just food retailing.
 
Whole Foods
 
We obtain our products
locally and from all over the world, often from small, uniquely dedicated food
artisans. We strive to offer the highest quality, least processed, most
flavorful and naturally preserved foods. We believe that food in its purest
state, unadulterated by artificial additives, sweeteners, colorings and
preservatives, is the best tasting and most nutritious food available.
 
Whole People
 
We recruit the best
people we can to become part of our team. We empower them to make many
operational decisions, creating a respectful workplace where team members are
treated fairly and are highly motivated to succeed. We look for team members
who are passionate about food, but also well-rounded human beings who can play
a critical role in helping to build our Company into a profitable and
beneficial part of every community in which we operate.
 
Whole Planet
 
We believe companies,
like individuals, must assume their share of responsibility for our planet. We
actively support organic farming on a global basis because we believe it is the
best method for promoting sustainable agriculture and protecting the
environment and farm workers. On a local basis, we are actively involved in our
communities by supporting food banks, sponsoring neighborhood events, and
contributing at least 5% of our after-tax profits in the form of cash or
products to not-for-profit organizations.
 
Whole Foods Market was
recognized in March 2008 in FORTUNE
magazine’s “America’s Most Admired Companies” list for the second year in a
row. The “Most Admired” list is the “definitive report card on corporate
reputations”; a list in which leaders of the Fortune 1000 and top foreign
companies operating in the U.S. rate companies in their own industry on eight
criteria. Among the seven most admired companies in the Food and Drug Stores
category, Whole Foods Market was ranked #4 by its peers, with #1 rankings in
the areas of Innovation, Social Responsibility, and Quality of Products.
 
Core
Values
 
Our
core values reflect what is truly important to us as an organization. They are
the underpinning of our corporate culture and the soul of our Company. They
transcend our size and growth, so regardless of how large we become, by
maintaining our core values we are able to preserve what has always been
special about our Company. In 2008, we added a sixth Core Value recognizing the
importance of our relationships with suppliers. Our supplier partners are our
allies in serving the interests of all of our stakeholders in bringing to
market the highest quality products available. We are committed to working with
honesty, integrity and transparency in partnership with our suppliers to
provide value, education and innovation to all of our stakeholders.
 
5





Table of Contents
 
Our
core values are:
 
·                  selling
the highest quality natural and organic products available;
 
·                  satisfying
and delighting our customers;
 
·                  supporting
team member happiness and excellence;
 
·                  creating
wealth through profits and growth;
 
·                  caring
about our communities and our environment; and
 
·                  creating
ongoing win-win partnerships with our suppliers.
 
These
core values speak to our belief in a balanced way of doing business. They very
succinctly express the purpose of our business, which is not only to make
profits, but to create value for all of our major stakeholders – our customers,
team members, suppliers, investors, and the community and environment. All are
linked interdependently.
 
Foundations
 
In 2005, we created two
independent, non-profit organizations, the Animal Compassion FoundationTM
and Whole Planet FoundationTM, designed to reach our larger
community stakeholders. The two private foundations were initially funded with
seed money totaling over $1 million raised from two global “Five Percent Days,”
in which five percent of the amount of all customer purchases at our stores was
donated to the foundations. Both foundations have been aligned with the mission
we set forth more than 28 years ago with respect to community involvement and
responsibility. As we have grown and are doing more business around the world,
we believe it has become increasingly important for us to extend our vision of “community”
from our backyards to the global markets in which we are trading.
 
Although the Animal
Compassion Foundation had much success leading and funding on-farm research and
producer workshops to learn and share best practices that support animal needs
and behaviors, in the fall of 2007, the Animal Compassion Foundation’s Board of
Directors voted to transition it from a private foundation into a new public
foundation in order to make an even greater impact worldwide on the way animals
raised for meat are cared for from birth to slaughter. The new organization,
called the Global Animal Partnership, was launched in spring 2008, switching
its primary focus away from the former Animal Compassion Foundation’s research
and education activities to concentrating its efforts on the further
development and launch of the 5-Step Animal Welfare Rating system.
 
The Whole Planet Foundation’s mission is to create
economic partnerships with the poor in the developing-world communities that
supply our stores with product. Through innovative assistance for
entrepreneurship – including direct micro-credit loans and tangible support for
other community partnership projects – the Whole Planet Foundation seeks to
expand the energy and creativity of every person with whom it works in order to
create wealth and prosperity in emerging economies. Micro-credit is a system
pioneered by Professor Muhammad Yunus, founder of the Grameen Bank in
Bangladesh and recipient of the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize. The philosophy behind
micro-credit is to provide the poor access to credit without requiring
contracts or collateral, enabling them to rise out of poverty through their own
efforts. The Whole Planet Foundation believes micro-credit is one of the best
methods to help individuals lift themselves out of poverty through their own
ingenuity. The Whole Planet Foundation has partnered with various micro-finance
institutions to support micro-lending programs in communities where the Company
sources products.
 
As of September 28, 2008, the Whole Planet
Foundation had committed over $7.9 million in grants to 11 micro-lending
projects. These projects are in Costa Rica, where Whole Foods Market sources
bananas and pineapples; Guatemala, Nicaragua, Indonesia, East Timor, Ethiopia
and Kenya, where Whole Foods Market has relationships with coffee farmers;
Honduras, where the Company sources bananas and buys coffee; and India, where
the Company buys tea. In addition, the Foundation’s partnerships in Nepal will
distribute $3.5 million in loans to 10,000 poor farmers over the next three
years, and its partnership with Grameen America in Jackson Heights, Queens, New
York City is working to help alleviate poverty through entrepreneurship by
providing loans, savings programs, credit establishment, and other services to
the working poor, with a focus on immigrant women in the U.S.
 
Together with customers, vendors
and team members, Whole Foods Market and the Whole Planet Foundation
have funded micro-lending projects for over 22,000 micro-entrepreneurs and
their families to date. It is estimated that each woman with whom the
foundation works in the developing world supports a family of five, which means
our support is indirectly
 
6





Table of Contents
 
contributing to the prosperity of 110,000 individuals.
Micro-entrepreneurs supported by the Whole Planet Foundation’s implementing
partners are utilizing the loans for home-based businesses such as poultry and
pig farming, agriculture, furniture making, tailoring, and selling handicrafts,
homemade and bakery-made foods, clothing and footwear. The Whole Planet
Foundation hopes to expand its projects in 2009 to include micro-lending in
Peru, Mexico, Argentina, Thailand and China, where Whole Foods Market sources
coffee and tea through its Allegro Coffee Company, as well as rice, grain, fruits
and vegetables.
 
Today, more than one
billion people are living on less than $1 a day. Whole Foods Market covers all
operating costs and the overhead budget for the Whole Planet Foundation, and directs $1 million annually, funded
in part by the sale of products under the Company’s Whole Trade Guarantee
program, to its micro-lending projects. Join us in empowering entrepreneurs in
the global community by donating online at www.wholeplanetfoundation.org. We have included the foundation’s
website address only as an inactive textual reference. The information
contained on the website is not incorporated by reference into this Report on Form 10-K.
 
Green Action
 
Supporting wise
environmental practices is part of our core values and strengthens our
commitment to being a leader in environmental stewardship. This means making
decisions that positively impact the health of our planet, its people and its
resources. Our Green Mission Task Force, comprised of team members and
leadership across the Company, is empowered to act on initiatives that support
our Green Mission. In 2008, we held our first ever Green Mission Congress,
bringing together representatives from each of our regions to share best practices and set
Company-wide intentions for energy efficiency, green building, and waste stream
reductions.
 
Renewable Energy.
Whole Foods Market uses a comprehensive
alternative energy approach to reduce its reliance on fossil fuels. Over the
years, we have purchased more than 1.2 million megawatt hours of wind-based
renewable energy. Our commitment to renewable energy purchasing has
earned us Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) Green Power awards for the
last four years. Our Berkeley, CA store was the nation’s first major food
retailer to introduce solar energy as its primary lighting source in 2002. We
now have close to a dozen locations either hosting or using solar power to
supplement traditional power, including one of the largest solar arrays in the
state of Connecticut at our distribution center. We also purchased an on-site
hydrogen fuel cell at our new Glastonbury, CT store, enabling the store to
generate 50 percent of the electricity and heat and nearly 100 percent of its
hot water needs on-site using fuel cell technology.
 
Energy Reduction and Efficiency. Whole Foods Market
is investing in energy monitoring equipment to identify system reduction
opportunities, and we are investing in retrofits of existing stores with more
energy efficient lighting, equipment, and mechanical components. The Company is
also upgrading its equipment and systems to improve energy efficiency in new
stores, efforts that may reduce energy consumption by 10 percent to 50 percent
in certain stores. In addition, the recent implementation of a Company-wide
energy and refrigerant tracking program is enabling us to develop a greenhouse
gas emissions inventory; preliminary emissions reduction targets have been set
but not yet published.
 
Green
Construction. We build our new stores with the
environment in mind, using green building innovations whenever possible. This
includes reducing the amount of virgin raw materials used in construction and
choosing eco-friendly laminates, paint and carpeting to minimize toxic resins
and volatile organic compounds released into the atmosphere. We also recycle construction
debris and reuse equipment where possible. Our store in Sarasota, FL received
Silver Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (“LEED”) certification by
the U.S. Green Building Council, the first ever environmentally friendly
supermarket designed in accordance with the LEED Green Building Rating System.
Our flagship store in Austin, TX is also LEED-certified, and our El Segundo, CA
store is LEED-CI (Corporate Interiors) certified. Additionally, we have
approximately 20 stores registered to become LEED-certified and more under
development.
 
Encouraging
Reusable Grocery Bags. Whole Foods
Market discontinued the use of disposable plastic grocery bags at the checkouts
in all stores in the U.S., Canada and the United Kingdom on Earth Day, April 22,
2008. We strongly encourage our customers to use reusable grocery bags by
providing affordable bags, including our $0.99 A Better Bag
made from recycled plastic bottles, and by paying at least a nickel per bag
refund at the checkout. Between Earth Day and the end of 2008 alone, we
estimate that we will keep 100 million new disposable plastic bags out of our
environment.
 
Composting and Recycling. Nearly all of our stores are involved in a recycling
program, and most participate in a composting program where food waste and
compostable paper goods are regenerated into compost. Additionally, in 2007, we
introduced an all-natural fiber packaging that is a compostable,
environmentally friendly alternative to traditional petroleum and wood- or
tree-based materials. Its fibers come from plants that are cultivated or grow
wild and are harvested annually. We are also working to eliminate the use of
Styrofoam packing materials in product shipments to our Company.
 
7





Table of Contents
 
Products
 
We offer a broad and
differentiated product selection with a strong emphasis on perishable foods
designed to appeal to both natural and organic foods and gourmet shoppers. Most
of our products are from natural and organic food vendors; however, we do sell
certain conventional national brands that meet our quality standards.
 
Quality
Standards
 
An integral part
of our Company mission is to promote the vitality and well-being of all
individuals by supplying the highest quality, most wholesome foods available.
We evaluate quality in terms of nutrition, freshness, appearance and taste. Our
search for quality is a never-ending process involving the careful judgment of
buyers throughout the Company.
 
·                  We
carefully evaluate each and every product that we sell.
 
·                  We
feature foods that are free of artificial preservatives, colors, flavors,
sweeteners and hydrogenated fats.
 
·                  We
are passionate about great tasting food and the pleasure of sharing it with
others.
 
·                  We
are committed to foods that are fresh, wholesome and safe to eat.
 
·                  We
seek out and promote organically grown foods.
 
·                  We
provide food and nutritional products that support health and well-being.
 
We monitor the production
and environmental practices of our seafood suppliers and support the seafood
sustainability work of the Marine Stewardship Council (“MSC”). The MSC is a
global, independent, non-profit fishery certification organization that rewards
sustainable fishing practices to ensure healthier marine environments and
abundant fish stocks for future generations. We are proud to be the first U.S.
retailer offering several varieties of MSC-certified seafood, which display the
MSC label to indicate the seafood is sourced from responsible, well-managed
fisheries. In addition to offering MSC-certified seafood in our stores, we have
also stopped selling several seafood species that are considered by a consensus
of seafood experts to be depleted in the oceans.
 
For farmed seafood, our
quality standards have always prohibited the use of antibiotics, added growth
hormones, preservatives and genetic modification or cloning. In fiscal year
2008, we began implementing a comprehensive set of enhanced farmed seafood
standards that include:
 
·                  farm-to-fork
traceability from the hatcheries to the ponds, pens, raceways or tanks where
the seafood is raised and to the plants where it is processed;
 
·                  requirements
that producers minimize the impact of fish farming on the environment by
protecting sensitive habitats such as mangrove forests and wetlands, monitoring
water quality to prevent pollution, and sourcing feed ingredients responsibly;
 
·                  the
prohibition of toxic chemicals such as malachite green and organophosphate; and
 
·                  requirements
that producers provide detailed information on their farming practices and pass
independent third-party audits.
 
8





Table of Contents
 
We also strictly monitor
how animals are raised and what they are fed. Our requirements for the meat and
poultry we sell in our stores ensure the animals are:
 
·                  raised
without antibiotics;
 
·                  raised
without added growth hormones in any species, far beyond the federal
regulations that prohibit added growth hormones in poultry, pigs, veal or
bison;
 
·                  never
fed animal byproducts;
 
·                  raised
by farmers and ranchers who care about the animals and the environment in which
they live; and
 
·                  monitored,
from the farm to our stores, to track compliance with our stringent animal
welfare and food safety requirements.
 
Animal
Welfare Standards
 
In
fiscal year 2008, the U.S. office of the World Society for the Protection of
Animals ranked Whole Foods Market first in its survey ranking 23 retail grocery
corporations in the United States by the availability of humanely labeled food
on their shelves, finding that Whole Foods Market offers twice as many humanely
labeled products per store as the second rated company.
 
Whole Foods Market
is strongly committed to helping create alternatives to the “factory farm”
methods of raising livestock. We have encouraged innovative animal production
practices to improve the quality and safety of the meat and poultry sold in our
stores, while also supporting humane living conditions for the animals. For
this reason, we refuse to sell commercial veal from tethered calves, foie gras
from force-fed ducks, and eggs from caged hens.
 
In December 2003,
we started working through a consultative multi-stakeholder process to develop “Animal
Compassionate” standards, farm animal treatment standards that go above and
beyond our baseline requirements for the meat and poultry sold in our
stores, focused on providing environments and conditions for each species
that support the animal’s natural physical, emotional and behavioral
well-being. In 2006, that work was then used as a basis for creating meat and
poultry production standards categorized according to a framework for
continuous improvement of animal welfare on farms and ranches and to provide
our customers with a clear and transparent way to make informed buying
decisions based solely on animal welfare considerations. In June 2007, we
piloted a five-tiered meat and poultry labeling program at our Kensington store
in London based on this framework. Further standards development and
implementation of the 5-Step Animal Welfare Rating system was transitioned to
the Global Animal Partnership foundation when it was founded in the spring of
2008. Whole Foods Market will conduct a two-year pilot for the Global Animal
Partnership to test the implementation of the 5-Step Animal Welfare Rating
system beginning in early 2009, before the foundation extends the program to
other retailers.
 
Product
Selection
 
Our product selection
includes, but is not limited to: produce, seafood, grocery, meat and poultry,
bakery, prepared foods and catering, specialty (beer, wine and cheese), coffee
and tea, nutritional supplements, vitamins, body care and educational products
such as books, floral, pet products and household products.
 
We believe our heavy
emphasis on perishable products differentiates us from other supermarkets and
helps us attract a broader customer base. We believe that all shoppers, not
just natural and organic food shoppers, appreciate great produce, dairy, meat,
seafood, bakery and prepared foods. We believe it is our strength of execution
in perishables that has attracted many of our most loyal customers.
 
Locally
Grown
 
Our history and
reputation are intimately linked to our support of local farmers. For more than
28 years, we have provided our customers with the broadest possible selection
of the highest quality produce available. Our search for produce begins right
outside our front door in every community where we do business. We are
committed to buying from local producers whose products meet our high quality
standards, particularly those who are dedicated to environmentally friendly,
sustainable agriculture. We are greatly increasing our efforts in this regard
by further empowering our individual store and regional buyers to seek out
locally grown products. We value this natural diversity and have firm
guidelines for using the term “local” in our stores. For example, only produce
that has traveled less than seven hours from the farm to our facility can be
labeled “locally grown.”
 
9





Table of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market
currently purchases produce from over 2,000 different farms through various
suppliers. Of the Company’s top 10 produce suppliers, eight represent
independent farms with privately held ownership. We believe we can and should
do more to support local producers. To that end, we have established a budget
of up to $10 million to promote local agriculture, especially animal
agriculture, wherever we have stores through long-term loans ranging from
$1,000 to $100,000 at low interest rates. We completed our first loan through
the Local Producer Loan Program in February 2007 and so far have disbursed
more than $1.7 million in loans to over 30 local producers company-wide. Loan
recipients must use funds for expansion and not operating expenses, meet Whole
Foods Market’s quality standards, and have a viable business plan and adequate
cash flow to service the debt. Eligible products include agricultural crops,
value-added food products, and other all-natural grocery items.
 
In addition, we provide
space in our parking lots throughout the year for local farmers to sell their
products directly to our customers, working in concert with existing farmers’
markets when possible. Our stores have excellent locations and strong customer
traffic to help these farmers’ markets flourish, and their presence at our
stores provides more local choices for our customers. Also, in 2008, we co-sponsored Farm Aid’s 2008 concert to support
America’s family farms and raise awareness about sustaining local agriculture.
As part of this sponsorship, our culinary team prepared 4,000 meals at the
event using local products.
 
Whole TradeTM Guarantee
 
In March 2007, we launched our Whole Trade Guarantee program, a
buying initiative that expands our social responsibility to bring together a
set of strict criteria for products sourced from developing countries. In a
shrinking global marketplace, the Whole Trade program is a logical extension of
our values that promote quality in everything we do, from products and business
practices to caring for our team members, communities and the environment. The
products in this program must meet specific criteria in four areas of
responsibility. They must:
 
·                  meet
our high quality standards;
 
·                  provide
more money to producers;
 
·                  ensure
better wages and working conditions for workers; and
 
·                  care
for the environment.
 
Products under the Whole Trade Guarantee meeting these criteria are
purchased at a price that is equal to or greater than the internationally
recognized fair trade price. For these products, Whole Foods Market donates 1%
of sales to the Whole Planet Foundation to help end world poverty.
 
Our Whole Trade Guarantee label is currently featured on over 960
items, and sales of approximately $44 million in fiscal year 2008 generated
approximately $442,000 for the Whole Planet Foundation.
 
Private
Label
 
An extension of our leadership position in the natural and
organic foods industry is our strong family of private label brands. These
products extend the confidence and trust our customers have in our stores to
their everyday lives. We have built upon this trust and over the last several
years have significantly expanded our
private label resources and offerings, which currently feature over 2,300 SKUs
led by our primary brands, 365 Everyday Value and 365 Organic. These
products are designed to cover the full spectrum of category needs: from the
highest quality, value entry-point products to super premium, unique offerings
that cater to true food aficionados. While some of our private label products
yield greater margins than their comparable brand alternative, their primary
purpose is to help differentiate our product selection and provide more value
offerings.
 
In addition to these nationally-driven
programs, we have a number of store-made and regionally-made fresh items sold
under the Whole Foods Market label. We also offer specialty and organic coffee, tea
and drinking chocolates through our Allegro Coffee Company subsidiary. In
addition, we have developed a grouping of “exclusive” and “control brand”
products to fill out our family of brands. Control brands are brands produced
exclusively for Whole Foods Market and not available to other retailers (e.g.,
Eternal Water). Exclusive products are either co-branded with the national
brand and Whole Foods Market brand or are a unique formulation or attribute
only available at Whole Foods Market. These products help continue to
differentiate Whole Foods Market selections across all aspects of our various
product categories. We currently have over 300 exclusive-branded products
across the center store.
 
10





Table of Contents
 
Private label sales in grocery accounted for approximately 25%
of our total retail sales in that product category in fiscal year 2008, up from
18% in fiscal year 2007. Total private label sales across all teams accounted
for approximately 10% of our retail sales in fiscal year 2008, up from 9% of
our retail sales in fiscal year 2007, reflecting the roll-out of approximately
300 new items in fiscal year 2008. We believe our private label sales could
grow to a much higher percentage of our sales over time as we continue to focus
on the development and growth of our product lines.
 
Economic
Value Added
 
We use Economic Value
Added (“EVA”™) as a basis for our business decisions and for determining
incentive compensation. In its simplest definition, EVA is equivalent to net
operating profits after taxes minus a charge for the cost of invested capital
necessary to generate those profits. We believe one of our core strengths is
our decentralized culture, where decisions are made at the store level, close
to the customer. We believe this is one of our strongest competitive advantages
and that EVA is the best financial framework that team members can use to help
make decisions that create sustainable shareholder value.
 
We use EVA extensively
for capital investment decisions, including evaluating new store real estate
decisions and store remodeling proposals. We only invest in projects that we believe
will add long-term value to the Company. The EVA decision-making model also
enhances operating decisions in stores. Our emphasis is on EVA improvement, as
we want to challenge our teams to continue to innovate and grow EVA in new
ways. We believe that opportunities always exist to increase sales and margins,
to lower operating expenses and to make investments that add value in ways that
benefit all of our stakeholders. We believe that focusing on EVA improvement
encourages continuous improvement of our business.
 
Approximately 1,000
leaders throughout the Company are on EVA-based incentive compensation plans,
of which the primary measure is EVA improvement. EVA-based plans cover our
senior executive leadership, regional leadership and the store leadership team
(store team leaders and assistant store team leaders) in all stores. Incentive
compensation for each of these groups is determined based on relevant EVA
measures at different levels, including the total Company level, the regional
level, the store or facility level, and the team level. We believe using EVA in
a multi-dimensional approach best measures the results of decisions made at
different levels of the Company. We expect EVA to remain a significant
component of our compensation structure throughout the Company in the coming
years.
 
Information about our EVA
financial results is not presented because of rules adopted by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) regarding non-GAAP financial
measures. Additional information about our EVA financial results is available
on our corporate website at www.wholefoodsmarket.com but is not incorporated by
reference into this Form 10-K.
 
Wild Oats
Markets, Inc.
 
On August 28, 2007, we completed the
acquisition of Wild Oats Markets, Inc., in a cash tender offer of $18.50
per share, or approximately $565 million plus the assumption of approximately
$148 million in existing debt. At the time of our acquisition, Wild Oats had
109 stores in 23 states and British Columbia, Canada operating under four
banners: Wild Oats Marketplace (nationwide), Henry’s Farmers Market (in
Southern California), Sun Harvest (in Texas), and Capers Community Market (in
British Columbia). On September 30, 2007, we completed the sale of all 27
Henry’s Farmers Market and eight Sun Harvest store locations and a related
Riverside, CA distribution center to a wholly owned subsidiary of Smart &
Final, Inc., a Los Angeles-based food retailer, for approximately $165
million. In fiscal year 2008, we closed 13 Wild Oats stores and relocated six
stores in connection with the opening of new Whole Foods Market stores in those
areas. Net of these closures and relocations, the Company had 55 Wild Oats and
Capers locations at the end of fiscal year 2008, with plans to close one
additional store and relocate two additional Wild Oats stores in fiscal year
2009. During fiscal year 2008, the Company completed the conversion of all Wild
Oats stores to the Company’s purchasing and information systems, transitioned
all Wild Oats team members to the Company’s payroll, benefits and incentive
compensation plans, eliminated all corporate positions at the Wild Oats home
office in Boulder, CO, and rebranded 45 Wild Oat stores with Whole Foods Market
store fronts and signage.
 
11





Table
of Contents
 
The following table provides
additional information about the Company’s acquired Wild Oats store locations
as of September 28, 2008:
 



 


 


Stores at
  Beginning of
  Fiscal Year 


 


Stores
  Relocated 


 


Stores
  Closed 


 


Stores at
  End of 
  Fiscal Year 


 




Total stores
  acquired


 


74


 


(6


)


(13


)


55


 




Average size
  (gross square feet)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


24,000


 




Total gross
  square footage


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


1,342,000


 




Average age (in
  years)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


10.2


 



 
Growth
Strategy
 
Whole Foods Market’s
growth strategy is to expand through a combination of new store openings and
acquisitions of existing stores. We have a disciplined, opportunistic real
estate strategy, opening stores in existing trade areas as well as new sites,
including international locations. Our new stores typically range in size
between 35,000 and 50,000 square feet and are located on premium real estate
sites. We have also grown through acquisitions, with approximately 25% of our
existing square footage coming from acquisitions. Because the food retailing
industry is highly fragmented and comprised of many smaller local and regional
chains, we may continue to pursue acquisitions of smaller chains that provide
access to desirable locations and experienced team members. Going forward,
however, such acquisitions are not expected to impact our future store growth
or financial results due to the size of the Company’s existing store base.
 
We have an ongoing
relocation strategy and each year relocate some of our smaller stores to larger
locations with improved visibility and parking. For the 17 stores relocated in
fiscal years 2004 through 2008, the overall average increase in size was
approximately 129%. Our historical store growth is summarized below:
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 


2005


 


2004


 




Stores at
  beginning of fiscal year


 


276


 


186


 


175


 


163


 


145


 




Stores opened


 


20


 


21


 


13


 


15


 


12


 




Acquired stores


 


—


 


109


 


1


 


—


 


7


 




Divested stores


 


—


 


(35


)


—


 


—


 


—


 




Relocations and closures


 


(21


)


(5


)


(3


)


(3


)


(1


)




Stores at end of
  fiscal year


 


275


 


276


 


186


 


175


 


163


 




Remodels with
  major expansions(1)


 


1


 


2


 


1


 


—


 


2


 




Total gross
  square footage at end of fiscal year


 


9,895,000


 


9,312,000


 


6,377,000


 


5,819,000


 


5,145,000


 



(1) Defined as remodels
with expansions of square footage greater than 20% completed during the fiscal
year.
 
In fiscal year
2008, we terminated 13 leases for stores in development totaling 679,000 square
feet, or an average of 52,000 square feet per store. As of November 5,
2008, we had signed leases for 66 stores scheduled to open through fiscal year
2012 totaling approximately 3.3 million square feet, or approximately 33% of
our existing square footage. These stores, which average approximately 49,000
square feet in size, include 13 relocations and eight new areas. Our historical
growth in stores in development is summarized below:
 



 


 


November 5,
  2008 


 


November 20,
  2007 


 


November 2,
  2006 


 


November 9,
  2005 


 


November 10,
  2004 


 




Stores in
  development


 


66


 


87


 


88


 


65


 


53


 




Average size
  (gross square feet)


 


49,000


 


51,000


 


56,000


 


55,000


 


49,000


 




Total gross
  square footage in development


 


3,294,000


 


4,485,000


 


5,003,000


 


3,626,000


 


2,594,000


 




As a percentage
  of existing square footage


 


33


%


48


%


77


%


60


%


50


%



 
We are focused on
the right sized store for each location and, since announcing in the third
quarter of 2007 our intent to decrease the size of several leases in
development, we have downsized nine leases by an average of 13,000 square feet
each. We currently operate 10 stores in excess of 65,000 gross square feet and
have an additional 10 stores of that size in development, five of which are
relocations. While our larger-format stores are very powerful in dense urban areas
and certain other limited circumstances, we recognize that smaller stores can
also produce great returns for us as well. We believe a store size of 35,000 to
50,000 square feet is appropriate in most circumstances to maximize return on
invested capital and EVA, and we expect the majority of our stores to fall
within that range going forward.
 
Tender dates provide some
visibility on the timing of our new store openings. For accounting purposes, a
property is considered tendered on the date we take possession of the leased
space for construction and other purposes, which is typically
 
12





Table of Contents
 
when the shell of the
store is complete or close to completion. As of November 5, 2008, 11 of
our 66 stores in development had been tendered to us, six of which currently
are expected to open in fiscal year 2009. These 11 stores total approximately
511,000 square feet.
 
The “tender period,”
which we define as the length of time between a store’s tender date and opening
date, varies depending on several factors, some of which are outside of our
control. These factors include the size of the store and complexity of site development,
the impact of weather and unforeseen environmental issues, and issues
surrounding construction labor unions and local government authorities, among
other things. Furthermore, acquired leases, ground leases and owned properties
generally have longer tender periods than standard operating leases because we
take possession of these locations earlier in the construction process. For
stores opened during the past two fiscal years, the average tender period was
9.3 months.
 
The following table
provides information about the Company’s store development activities:
 



 


 


Stores Opened 
  During Fiscal 
  Year 2007


 


Stores Opened 
  During Fiscal 
  Year 2008


 


Properties
  Tendered
  as of 
  November 5, 2008


 


Total
  Leases Signed 
  as of 
  November 5, 2008


 




Number of stores
  (including relocations)


 


21


 


20


 


11


 


66


 




Number of
  relocations


 


5


 


6


 


2


 


13


 




Number of lease
  acquisitions, ground leases and owned properties 


 


4 


 


4 


 


6 


 


8 


 




New areas


 


3


 


3


 


2


 


8


 




Average store
  size (gross square feet)


 


56,500


 


53,000


 


46,400


 


49,100


 




As a percentage
  of existing store average size


 


167


%


146


%


128


%


135


%




Total square
  footage


 


1,185,800


 


1,060,700


 


510,900


 


3,293,900


 




As a percentage
  of existing square footage


 


13


%


11


%


5


%


33


%




Average tender
  period in months


 


8.8


 


9.7


 


 


 


 


 




Average
  pre-opening expense per store


 


$


2.6 million


(1)


$


2.5 million


 


 


 


 


 




Average
  pre-opening rent per store


 


$


0.9 million


(1)


$


1.1 million


 


 


 


 


 




Average
  development cost


 


$


15.1 million


(1)


$


15.8 million


 


 


 


 


 




Average development
  cost per square foot


 


$


278


(1)


$


297


(2)


 


 


 


 



(1)Average pre-opening
and development costs exclude the Kensington store opened in London during
fiscal year 2007.
(2)Average development
costs exclude pre-opening and include estimated costs for stores not yet final.
 
Site
Selection
 
Most of our stores are
located in high-traffic shopping areas and are either freestanding or in a
strip center. We also have a number of urban stores located in high-density,
mixed-use projects. In selecting store locations, we use an internally
developed model to analyze potential sites based on various criteria such as
education levels, population density and income levels within certain drive
times. We primarily seek to open stores that typically range in size from 35,000
to 50,000 square feet and are located on premier real estate sites, often in
urban, high-population locales. After we have selected a target site, our
development group does a comprehensive site study and sales projection. Each
project must meet an internal EVA hurdle return.
 
The required cash
investment for new stores varies depending on the size of the store, geographic
location, degree of work performed by the landlord and complexity of site
development issues. For stores opened during the past two fiscal years
excluding Kensington in London, the average size was 53,700 square feet, and
our new store investment averaged approximately $15.4 million excluding
pre-opening and relocation expenses, which averaged approximately $2.5 million
per store.
 
Store
Operations
 
Team Approach to Store Operations
 
We strive to
promote a strong Company culture featuring a team approach to store operations
that we believe is distinctly more empowering of team members than that of the
traditional supermarket. Our domestic Whole Foods Market stores each employs
between 25 and 600 team members who comprise up to 13 teams per store, each led
by a team leader. Each team within a store is responsible for a different
product offerings or aspect of store operations such as customer service,
prepared foods, or grocery, among others. We also promote a decentralized team
approach to store operations in which many decisions are made by teams at the
individual store level. In this structure, an effective store team leader is
critical to the success of the store. The store team leader works closely with
one or more associate store team leaders, as well as with all of the department
team leaders, to operate the store as efficiently and profitably as possible.
Each year, our team members are asked to complete
 
13





Table
of Contents
 
a confidential,
third party-administered team leader survey, which provides them with an
opportunity to give their leaders constructive feedback.
 
We believe our success is
dependent on the collective energy and intelligence of all of our team members.
We strive to create a work environment where motivated team members can
flourish and reach their highest potential, and where they are inspired by work
that provides them with a greater sense of purpose and mission. For many team
members, their job is an extension of their personal philosophy and lifestyle.
Together, we go to great lengths to satisfy and delight our customers.
 
Team members are involved
at all levels of our business. We strive to create a Company-wide consciousness
of “shared fate” by uniting the interests of team members as closely as
possible with the interests of our shareholders. One way we reinforce this
concept is through gainsharing. Our gainsharing program rewards things such as
labor productivity that team members can control, giving them a direct stake in
the success of our business. We also encourage stock ownership among team
members through the following programs:
 
·                  Team
Member Stock Option Plan. All full-time and part-time team members are eligible
to receive a grant of stock options each year. The annual grant has two
components: (i) Annual Leadership Grants to recognize and incentivize team
member performance; and (ii) Service Hour Grants to recognize team member
service to the Company. In 2008 our Board of Directors awarded approximately
2.2 million options to more than 17,400 team members. Of these stock options,
96% were granted to non-executives, with 47% awarded as Service Hour Grants
alone.
 
·                  Team
Member Stock Purchase Plan. Through bi-weekly payroll deductions, all
U.S.-based non-seasonal team members with at least 400 service hours may elect
to purchase unrestricted shares of our stock at 95% of market value on the
purchase date. The shares are purchased for the plan participants on a
quarterly basis.
 
·                  Team
Member 401(k) Plan. Whole Foods Market stock is an investment option
within the Company’s 401(k) plan.
 
Store Description
 
We do not have a standard
store design model. Instead, each store’s design is customized to fit the size
and configuration of the particular location and community in which it is
located. Our culture and philosophy is one of continual innovation and
experimentation, and successful experiments are voluntarily picked up and
improved upon by our stores. We strive to transform food shopping from a chore
into a dynamic experience by building and operating stores with colorful décor,
well-trained team members, exciting product mixes, teams of in-store chefs,
ever-changing selections, samples, open kitchens, scratch bakeries,
hand-stacked produce, prepared foods stations and European-style charcuterie
departments. To further a sense of community and interaction with customers,
our stores typically include sit-down eating areas, customer comment boards and
customer service booths. We have “Take Action” centers for our customers who
want to be informed on important issues relative to environmental, legislative,
food safety and product quality issues that can directly affect our customers’
health and well-being. In addition, some stores offer special services such as
massage, valet parking and home delivery. We believe our stores play a unique
role as a third place, besides the home and office, where people can gather,
interact and learn while at the same time discovering the many joys of eating
and sharing food.
 
Purchasing and Distribution
 
Our buyers purchase
products for retail sale from local, regional, national and international
wholesale suppliers and vendors. The majority of our purchasing, an estimated
90% of the total center store, occurs at the regional and national levels. This
enables us to negotiate better volume discounts with major vendors and
distributors, while allowing our regional and store buyers to focus on local
products and the unique product mix necessary to keep a neighborhood market
feel in our stores. We are increasingly focusing more of our purchasing on
producer-direct and manufacture-direct programs, and we remain committed to
buying from local producers that meet our high quality standards.
 
We own two produce procurement centers which
facilitate the procurement and distribution of the majority of the produce we
sell. We also operate four seafood-processing and distribution facilities, a
specialty coffee and tea procurement and brewing operation, a confectionary,
and nine regional distribution centers, which distribute a full range of
products to our stores across the U.S., Canada and the United Kingdom. In
addition, we have five regional commissary kitchens and eight bakehouse
facilities, all of which distribute products to our stores. Other products are
typically procured through a combination of specialty wholesalers and direct
distributors.
 
United Natural Foods, Inc. is our
single largest third-party supplier, accounting for approximately 32% of our
total purchases in fiscal year 2008. In November 2006, we extended our
long-term relationship with United Natural Foods as our primary supplier of dry
grocery and frozen food products. Our seven-year agreement allows us to
concentrate our capital and
 
14





Table of Contents
 
resources on executing on our new store
development pipeline and to focus our internal distribution efforts around key
perishable departments.
 
Marketing
 
We spend much less on
advertising and marketing than other supermarkets – approximately 0.5% of our
total sales in fiscal year 2008. Instead, we rely on word-of-mouth
recommendations and testimonials from our shoppers, and we allocate our
marketing budgets among national and regional programs and our individual
stores. Our stores spend most of their marketing budgets on in-store
marketing-related activities, including promotional signage and events such as
local farmers’ markets, taste fairs, classes, tours and product samplings. Our
marketing support mirrors our business model, as well as our commitment to the
community and environment. Each store retains a separate budget for making
contributions to a variety of philanthropic and community activities, fostering
goodwill and developing a high profile with the community. Contributions
(including in-kind contributions of food) to not-for-profit organizations
amount to at least 5% of our after-tax profits annually.
 
Customer
Service
 
Customers are our most
important stakeholder, because without our customers, we would have no
business. We genuinely care about the well-being of our customers and empower
our team members to do whatever it takes to meet or exceed their expectations
on every shopping trip. By doing so, we turn our customers into advocates for
our business who do more than shop with us; they recommend Whole Foods Market
to their friends and others. We want to serve our customers competently,
efficiently, and knowledgeably. We believe that we generate greater
appreciation and loyalty from our customers by educating them about natural and
organic foods, health, nutrition and the environment through our in-store “Take
Action” centers, The Whole Deal newsletter, Value Tours, as well as on our
corporate website.
 
Team Members
 
As of September 28,
2008, we had approximately 52,900 team members, including approximately 46,800
full-time, 3,800 part-time and 2,200 temporary team members. We are proud that
92% of our permanent team members are full-time team members, which we believe
is very high for the food retailing industry and allows us to better serve our
customers.
 
One of our core values is
supporting team member happiness and excellence, and we believe our innovative
and egalitarian work environment with team members involved at all levels of
our business is a major reason for our success. We believe happy team members
create happy customers, and happy customers create happy investors. Team
members who have a voice in shaping the direction of our Company and their
future are empowered to make Whole Foods Market not only a great place to shop
but a great place to build a career. All of our full-time and part-time team members
are eligible to receive stock options. In addition, team members are encouraged
to take an active role in choosing the benefits made available by the Company
by participating in a Company-wide benefits vote every three years. The Company’s
second vote was held in fiscal year 2006 to determine the benefits program that
will be in place from 2007 through 2009. Approximately 77% of eligible team
members voted in this important process, resulting in a benefits package that
reflects the needs and desires of the majority of team members in the Company.
One outcome of the vote is that Whole Foods Market provides healthcare at no
cost to eligible full-time team members. Eligible full-time team members are
those who work 30 or more hours per week and have worked a minimum of 800
service hours. Dependent healthcare premiums are shared based on a team member’s
tenure with the Company; the team member’s share decreases as his/her tenure
increases.
 
For the past 11 years,
our team members have helped Whole Foods Market become one of FORTUNE magazine’s “100 Best Companies to Work for in
America.” In scoring companies, Fortune places the greatest weight (two-thirds
of the total) on responses to a random survey of 400 employees, with the
remainder being Fortune’s evaluation of each company’s credibility, respect,
fairness and pride/camaraderie. Ranking number 16 in 2008, we are one of only
14 companies to make the “100 Best” list for 11 consecutive years since its
inception.
 
Competition
 
Food retailing is a
large, intensely competitive industry. Our competition varies across the
company and includes but is not limited to local, regional, national and
international conventional and specialty supermarkets, natural foods stores,
warehouse membership clubs, smaller specialty stores, and restaurants, each of
which competes with us on the basis of product selection, quality, customer
service, price or a combination of these factors. We believe our commitment to
natural and organic products, high quality standards, emphasis on perishable
product sales, our focus on customer service, and our competitive prices on
comparable products differentiates us in this marketplace. We also believe our
strongest competitive advantage is our culture and empowered team members.
 
Natural and organic food
is one of the fastest growing segments of food retailing today. Most
supermarkets offer at least a limited selection of these products, while some
have chosen to expand their selection more aggressively. We believe it works to
our benefit for other supermarkets to offer natural and organic products for
two reasons: first, it helps fulfill our
 
15





Table of Contents
 
Company mission to
improve the health, well-being and healing of both people and the planet, and
second, it helps create new customers for us by creating a gateway experience.
As more people are exposed to the benefits of natural and organic products, we
believe they are more likely to become Whole Foods Market customers since we
are a category leader for natural and organic products, offering one of the
largest selections and most informed customer service at competitive prices.
 
Competition makes us a
better retailer. We are constantly evolving, innovating and maturing, and we
have a long track record of responding to competition and improving from it. We
believe we are better positioned from a value and price perspective today than
we ever have been. Our buy-side initiatives are continuing to deliver
opportunities that will allow us to be more price competitive, and we are
leveraging our global buying power to the benefit of our customers. On the sell
side, we remain focused on innovation that redefines the marketplace and
further differentiates our stores, products, and customer experience from the
competition.
 
The Whole Deal
 
Whole
Foods Market has always provided customers with a great value on the products
we offer: high-quality perishables and products from sources consumers trust,
thanks to our rigorous Quality Standards and focus on natural and organic
foods. Through our national “The Whole Deal” campaign launched in fiscal year
2008, we are emphasizing the value side of our story even more. The Whole Deal
is about giving customers the whole story to help them stretch their grocery
and household dollars further without sacrificing the benefits of natural and
organic foods. The program includes The Whole Deal newsletter available in our
stores, which contains coupons, budget recipes, money saving tips and more;
in-store Value Tours led by our “Value Gurus” to help shoppers find the best
deals in every department; and Sure Deal specials, which are special deals on
high-quality products our customers want, not discounts on overstocked or
discontinued items.
 
Government and Public Affairs
 
Our stores are subject to
various local, state, federal and international laws, regulations and
administrative practices affecting our business. We must comply with provisions
regulating health and sanitation standards, food labeling, equal employment,
minimum wages and licensing for the sale of food and, in some stores, alcoholic
beverages.
 
The manufacturing,
processing, formulating, packaging, labeling and advertising of products are
subject to regulation by various federal agencies including the Food and Drug
Administration (“FDA”), the Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), the Consumer
Product Safety Commission (“CPSC”), the USDA and the EPA. The composition and
labeling of nutritional supplements are most actively regulated by the FDA
under the provisions of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (“FFDC Act”).
The FFDC Act has been revised in recent years with respect to dietary
supplements by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act and by the Dietary
Supplement Health and Education Act. We believe we are materially in compliance
with product labeling requirements.
 
Trademarks
 
Trademarks owned by the
Company or its subsidiaries include, but are not limited to: “Whole Foods
Market,” “365 Everyday Value,” “365 Organic Everyday Value,” “AFA,” “Allegro
Coffee Company,” “Wild Oats,” “Wild Oats Marketplace,” “Capers Community
Market,” “Bread & Circus,” “Fresh & Wild,” “Fresh Fields,” “Global
Local,” “Green Mission,” “Harry’s Farmers Market,” “Merchant of Vino,” “Mrs. Gooch’s,”
“Vine Buys,” “Wellspring,” “Whole Baby,” “Whole Foods, Whole People, Whole
Planet,” “Whole Kids Organic,” and “Whole Trade.” The Company or its
subsidiaries also holds registrations or applications, and maintains common law
trademark rights for stylized logos and brand names for products created by
Allegro Coffee Company and many of its private label products.
 
wholefoodsmarket.com
 
Our corporate website at www.wholefoodsmarket.com averages over
50,000 visitors each day and provides detailed information about our Company,
history, product offerings and store locations, with hundreds of recipes and a
library of information about environmental, legislative, health, food safety
and product quality issues. In addition, access to the Company’s SEC filings, including
annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current
reports on Form 8-K, Section 16 filings, and all amendments to those reports, are available through our
website free of charge, as soon as reasonably practicable after these
reports are filed electronically with the SEC. As with our stores, the focus of our website is customer
service. We believe our website provides us with an opportunity to further our
relationships with customers, suppliers and investors, to educate them on a
variety of issues, and to improve our service levels.
 
In 2008, our website underwent some big changes. In addition to
seeing a major facelift throughout the site, customers can now create a
personalized profile that keeps track of their favorite parts of the site and a
“home” store; rate and review recipes; share value shopping tips; contribute to
forums and interact with other Whole Foods Market stakeholders; and check out
the new “Whole Story” blog, which is regularly updated for all of the new and
exciting things going on at the Company
 
16





Table of Contents
 
and our stores. The new wholefoodsmarket.com website is just one
part of our expanded internet community for stakeholders, which also includes
sites like Facebook and Twitter.
 
We have included our website address only as an inactive textual
reference. The information contained on our website is not incorporated by
reference into this Report on Form 10-K.
 
Executive
Officers of the Registrant
 
The following table sets
forth the name, age, tenure with the Company in years, and position of each of
the persons who was serving as an executive officer of the Company as of November 21,
2008:
 



Name


 


Age


 


Tenure


 


Position


 




John P. Mackey


 


55


 


30


 


Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer


 




A.C. Gallo


 


55


 


15


 


Co-President and Chief Operating Officer


 




Walter Robb


 


55


 


17


 


Co-President and Chief Operating Officer


 




Glenda
  Chamberlain


 


55


 


20


 


Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


 




James P. Sud


 


56


 


11


 


Executive Vice President of Growth and Business
  Development


 



 
John P. Mackey,
co-founder of the Company, has served as Chairman of the Board and Chief
Executive Officer since 1980.
 
A.C. Gallo has served as
Co-President of the Company since September 2004 and as Co-Chief Operating
Officer since December 2003. Mr. Gallo has held various positions
with the Company and with Bread & Circus, Inc., which was
acquired by the Company in October 1992, including Vice President and
President of the North Atlantic Region, and Executive Vice President of
Operations.
 
Walter Robb has served as
Co-President of the Company since September 2004 and as Co-Chief Operating
Officer since December 2003. Since joining the Company in 1991, Mr. Robb
has also served as Store Team Leader, President of the Northern Pacific Region,
and Executive Vice President of Operations.
 
Glenda Chamberlain has served
as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of the Company since December 1988.
 
James P. Sud has served
as Executive Vice President of Growth and Business Development since February 2001.
Mr. Sud joined the Company in May 1997 and served as Vice President
and Chief Operating Officer until February 2001. Mr. Sud served as a
director of the Company from 1980 to 1997.
 
Item 1A.     Risk
Factors.
 
We wish to caution you
that there are risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to
be materially different from those indicated by forward-looking statements that
we make from time to time in filings with the SEC, news releases, reports, proxy
statements, registration statements and other written communications, as well
as oral forward-looking statements made from time to time by representatives of
the Company. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the
risks described below. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known
to us or that we currently deem immaterial also may impair our business
operations. The cautionary statements below discuss important factors that
could cause our business, financial condition, operating results and cash flows
to be materially adversely affected. The Company does not undertake any
obligation to update forward-looking statements.
 
Our
Growth Is Significantly Dependent on New Store Openings and Acquisitions
 
Our strategy is to expand
through a combination of new store openings and, to a lesser extent,
acquisitions of existing store locations or businesses. Successful
implementation of this strategy is contingent on numerous conditions, some of
which are described below, and there can be no assurance that this expansion
strategy can be successfully executed.
 
Our continued growth
depends to a significant degree on our ability to open or acquire new stores in
existing and new locations and to operate these stores successfully. Our expansion
strategy is dependent on finding suitable locations, and we face intense
competition from other retailers for such sites. There can be no assurance that
we will continue to grow through new store openings and/or acquisitions. We may
not be able to timely open new stores or operate them successfully. Also, we
may not be able to successfully hire and train new team members or integrate
those team members into the programs and policies of the Company. We may not be
able to adapt our distribution, management information and other operating
systems to adequately supply products to new stores at competitive prices so
that we can operate the stores in a successful and profitable manner.
 
17





Table of Contents
 
Our Business May be
Sensitive to Economic Conditions that Impact Consumer Spending
 
Our results of operations
may be sensitive to changes in overall economic conditions that impact consumer
spending, including discretionary spending. Future economic conditions
affecting disposable consumer income such as employment levels, business
conditions, changes in housing market conditions, the availability of credit,
interest rates, tax rates, fuel and energy costs, the impact of natural
disasters or acts of terrorism, and other matters could reduce consumer
spending or cause consumers to shift their spending to lower-priced
competitors. A general reduction in the level of discretionary spending or
shifts in consumer discretionary spending to our competitors could adversely
affect our growth and profitability.
 
We May Not
Realize the Benefits from Acquisitions Contemplated at the Time of Transaction
 
Risks we may face in connection
with acquisitions include being unable to successfully integrate acquired
businesses into our operations and support systems, or the operations of
acquired businesses may be adversely affected by the introduction of our
decentralized operational approach. Costs associated with integrating the
operations of acquired companies may be greater than anticipated. Also, the
integration of acquired operations into our operations requires the dedication
of management resources that may detract attention from our day-to-day business
to a degree greater than anticipated. An acquisition may not further our
business strategy as we expected, or we may pay more than the acquired company
or assets are worth. Our due diligence process may fail to identify all of the
problems, liabilities or other significant issues of an acquired company. These
risks associated with acquisitions could have a material adverse effect on our
business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.
 
New Stores May Negatively
Impact Our Results
 
There can be no assurance
that our new store openings will be successful or result in greater sales and
profitability for the Company. New stores build their sales volumes and refine
their merchandise selection over time and, as a result, generally have lower
gross margins and higher operating expenses as a percentage of sales than our
more mature stores. There may be a negative impact on our results from a lower
contribution of new stores, along with the impact of related pre-opening and relocation
costs.
 
We May Experience
Significant Fluctuations in Our Comparable Store Sales
 
Our comparable store
sales could fluctuate or be lower than our historical average for many reasons
including new and acquired stores entering into the comparable store base, the
opening of new stores that cannibalize store sales in existing areas, general
economic conditions, increased competition, price changes in response to
competitive factors, possible supply shortages, and cycling against any year of
above-average sales results. Our results of operations may be materially
impacted by fluctuations in our comparable store sales as the result of lower
sales, lower gross profits and/or greater operating costs such as marketing.
 
We May Experience
Significant Fluctuations in Our Quarterly Operating Results
 
Our quarterly operating
results could fluctuate for many reasons, including losses from new stores,
variations in the mix of product sales, price changes in response to
competitive factors and a potential lack of customer acceptance, foreign
currency exchange rate fluctuations, increases in store operating costs,
including commodity costs, that are either wholly or partially beyond our
control, possible supply shortages, general economic conditions, legal costs, insurance
costs, extreme weather-related disruptions, including hurricanes and
earthquakes, and potential uninsured casualty losses or other losses. In
addition, our quarterly operating results may fluctuate significantly as the
result of the timing of new store openings, construction and pre-opening
expenses, the timing of acquisitions, store closures and relocations, and the
range of operating results generated from newly opened stores.
Quarter-to-quarter comparisons of results of operations have been and may be
materially impacted by the timing of new store openings.
 
Increased
Competition May Have an Adverse Effect on Profitability
 
Our competitors include
but are not limited to local, regional, national and international
supermarkets, natural food stores, warehouse membership clubs, small specialty
stores and restaurants. These businesses compete with us for products,
customers, and locations. In addition, some are expanding more aggressively in
marketing a range of natural and organic foods. Some of these potential
competitors may have been in business longer or may have greater financial or
marketing resources than we do and may be able to devote greater resources to
sourcing, promoting and selling their products. As competition in certain areas
intensifies, our results of operations may be negatively impacted through a
loss of sales, reduction in margin from competitive price changes, and/or
greater operating costs such as marketing.
 
Our Results Are Subject to the
Risks of Doing Business in Other Countries
 
In fiscal year 2008,
sales at our stores in Canada and the U.K. accounted for approximately 3% of
our total sales. Though small as a percentage of total sales, the Company’s
international operations are subject to certain risks of conducting business 
 
18





Table of Contents
 
abroad, including
fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, changes in regulatory
requirements, and changes or uncertainties in the economic, social and
political conditions in the Company’s geographic areas, among other things.
 
Legal
Proceedings Could Materially Impact Our Results
 
From time to time, we are
party to legal proceedings, including matters involving personnel and
employment issues, personal injury, intellectual property, acquisitions, and
other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. In addition, the
FTC has resumed its administrative action challenging the Company’s August 28,
2007 acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. Our results could be materially impacted
by the decisions and expenses related to pending or future proceedings.
 
We May Be Subject to Product
Liability Claims if People Are Harmed By the Products We Sell
 
There is increasing
governmental scrutiny of and public awareness regarding food safety. We believe
that many customers choose to shop our stores because of their interest in
health, nutrition and food safety. We believe that our customers hold us to a
higher food safety standard than other supermarkets. The real or perceived sale
of contaminated food products by us could result in product liability claims,
the settlement or outcome of which might have a material adverse effect on our
sales and operations.
 
The Loss
of Key Management Could Negatively Affect Our Business
 
We are dependent upon a
number of key management and other team members. If we were to lose the
services of a significant number of key team members within a short period of
time, this could have a material adverse effect on our operations. We do not
maintain key person insurance on any team member. Our continued success is also
dependent upon our ability to attract and retain qualified team members to meet
our future growth needs. We face intense competition for qualified team
members, many of whom are subject to offers from competing employers. We may
not be able to attract and retain necessary team members to operate our
business.
 
Unions May Attempt to
Organize Our Team Members
 
Unions have from time to
time attempted to organize all or part of our team member base at certain
stores and non-retail facilities. Responding to such organization attempts is
distracting to management and team members and may have a negative financial
impact on a store, facility or the Company as a whole.
 
Unfavorable Changes in Government
Regulation Could Harm Our Business
 
Our stores are subject to
various international, federal, state and local laws, regulations and
administrative practices affecting our business, and we must comply with
provisions regulating health and sanitation standards, food labeling, equal
employment, minimum wages and licensing for the sale of food and, in some
stores, alcoholic beverages. Our new store openings could be delayed or
prevented or our existing stores could be impacted by difficulties or failures
in our ability to obtain or maintain required approvals or licenses.
 
The manufacturing,
processing, formulating, packaging, labeling and advertising of products are
subject to regulation by various federal agencies including the FDA, FTC, CPSC,
USDA and EPA. The composition and labeling of nutritional supplements are most
actively regulated by the FDA under the provisions of the FFDC Act. The FFDC
Act has been revised in recent years with respect to dietary supplements by the
Nutrition Labeling and Education Act and by the Dietary Supplement Health and
Education Act.
 
The USDA’s Organic Rule facilitates
interstate commerce and the marketing of organically produced food and provides
assurance to our customers that such products meet consistent, uniform
standards. Compliance with this rule could pose a significant burden on
some of our suppliers, which may cause a disruption in some of our product
offerings.
 
We cannot predict the
nature of future laws, regulations, interpretations or applications, or
determine what effect either additional government regulations or
administrative orders, when and if promulgated, or disparate federal, state and
local regulatory schemes would have on our business in the future. They could,
however, require the reformulation of certain products to meet new standards,
the recall or discontinuance of certain products not able to be reformulated,
additional record keeping, expanded documentation of the properties of certain
products, expanded or different labeling and/or scientific substantiation. Any
or all of such requirements could have an adverse effect on our results of
operations and financial condition.
 
A
Widespread Health Epidemic Could
Materially Impact Our Business
 
The Company’s business
could be severely impacted by a widespread regional, national or global health
epidemic. Our stores are a place where customers come together, interact and
learn while at the same time discovering the many joys of eating and sharing
food. A widespread health epidemic may cause customers to avoid public
gathering places or otherwise change their 
 
19





Table
of Contents
 
shopping behaviors.
Additionally, a widespread health epidemic could also adversely impact our
business by disrupting production and delivery of products to our stores and by
impacting our ability to appropriately staff our stores.
 
Changes in the Availability of
Quality Natural and Organic Products Could Impact Our Business
 
There is no assurance
that quality natural and organic products will be available to meet our future
needs. If other supermarkets significantly increase their natural and organic
product offerings or if new laws require the reformulation of certain products
to meet tougher standards, the supply of these products may be constrained. Any
significant disruption in the supply of quality natural and organic products
could have a material impact on our overall sales and cost of goods sold.
 
Perishable
Foods Product Losses Could Materially Impact Our Results
 
We believe our stores
more heavily emphasize perishable products than other supermarket stores.
Perishable products accounted for approximately 67% of total sales at Whole
Foods Market locations in fiscal year 2008. The Company’s emphasis on
perishable products may result in significant product inventory losses in the
event of extended power outages, natural disasters or other catastrophic
occurrences.
 
Our Stock Price Is Volatile
 
The market price of our
common stock could be subject to significant fluctuation in response to various
market factors and events. These market factors and events include variations
in our sales and earnings results and any failure to meet market expectations;
changes in ratings and earnings estimates by securities analysts; publicity
regarding us, our competitors, the natural products industry generally; new
statutes or regulations or changes in the interpretation of existing statutes
or regulations affecting the natural products industry specifically; sales of
substantial amounts of common stock in the public market or the perception that
such sales could occur and other factors. In addition, the stock market in
recent years has experienced broad price and volume fluctuations that often
have been unrelated to the operating performance of particular companies. These
market fluctuations also may adversely affect the market price of our common
stock.
 
Future
Economic Factors Could Cause Impairment of Goodwill
 
Our total assets included
goodwill totaling approximately $659.6 million at September 28, 2008. In
accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (“SFAS”) No. 142,
“Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets”, goodwill is reviewed for impairment
annually or more frequently if impairment indicators arise. We allocate
goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. As described in
“Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments” of this Report, we continue discussions
with the Staff of the SEC’s Division of Corporation Finance regarding the
Company’s goodwill impairment testing and operation as a single operating
segment. Our impairment reviews require extensive use of accounting judgment
and financial estimates. Application of alternative assumptions and
definitions, such as reviewing goodwill for impairment at a different
organization level, could produce significantly different results. We may be
required to recognize impairments of goodwill based on future economic factors
such as unfavorable changes in the Company’s stock price and market
capitalization, unfavorable changes in valuations of comparable companies, or
unfavorable changes in estimated future discounted cash flows of the Company’s
reporting unit. Impairment of goodwill could result in material charges that
would adversely affect our results of operations and capitalization.
 
Future Events Could Result in
Impairment of Our Long-Lived Assets
 
Our total assets included
long-lived assets totaling approximately $1.9 billion at September 28,
2008. In accordance with SFAS No. 144, “Accounting for the Impairment or
Disposal of Long-Lived Assets”, long-lived assets are evaluated for impairment
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount
of an asset may not be recoverable. Our impairment evaluations require use of
financial estimates of future cash flows. Application of alternative
assumptions could produce significantly different results. We may be required to
recognize impairments of long-lived assets based on future economic factors
such as unfavorable changes in estimated future undiscounted cash flows of an
asset group. Long-lived asset impairments could result in material charges that
would adversely affect our results of operations and capitalization.
 
Changes in the Number of Stock
Option Exercises Could Impact Our Cash Flow
 
Our cash flow from the
exercise of team member stock options may be adversely affected in the future
by fluctuations in the market price of our common stock, changes in income tax
law, and changes in the number of stock options we grant.
 
Capital
Needed for Expansion and General Corporate Purposes May Not Be Available
 
The construction and
opening or acquisition of new stores and the development of new production and
distribution facilities, along with the remodeling and renovation of existing
stores, require significant amounts of capital. In the past, our growth has
been funded primarily through proceeds from public offerings, bank debt,
private placements of debt, internally generated cash flow, and proceeds from
stock option exercises. These and other sources of capital may not be available
to us in the future or may be more expensive to obtain. In addition,
restrictive covenants that may be imposed by our lenders may limit our ability
to fund our growth. On November 5, 2008, we entered into an agreement with
affiliates of Leonard Green & Partners, L.P. to issue and sell $425
million of newly-issued shares of preferred stock to enhance our liquidity
position. The 
 
20





Table
of Contents
 
closing and funding of
the transaction is subject to certain customary closing conditions, including
the receipt of customary regulatory approvals. There can be no assurance that
these approvals will be received. We cannot assure that we could raise any
additional capital on similar terms, or at all, which could have a material adverse
effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
 
We Have
Significant Indebtedness
 
We have significant debt
and may incur additional debt in the future. A significant portion of our
future cash flow from operating activities may be dedicated to the payment of
interest and the repayment of principal on our indebtedness. We may not be able
to refinance our debt in the future on terms acceptable to us, or at all. Our
indebtedness could limit our ability to obtain additional financing for working
capital, capital expenditures, debt service requirements, acquisitions or other
purposes in the future. There is no guarantee that we will be able to meet our
debt service obligations. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow to
meet our debt service obligations, we may be required to take measures such as
seeking additional financing in the debt or equity markets, refinancing or
restructuring all of a portion of our indebtedness, selling selected assets or
reducing or delaying planned capital or operating expenditures. If we fail to
comply with our debt covenants we will be in default, in which case there can
be no assurance that we would be able to cure the default, receive waivers from
our lenders, amend the loan agreements or refinance the debt.
 
The Capital Markets are Currently
Experiencing a Period of Dislocation and Instability.
 
We believe that the
dramatic deflation of asset valuations due in large part to the collapse of the
subprime lending market has caused a general disruption in the U.S. capital
markets. This collapse is evidenced by a lack of liquidity in the debt capital
markets, significant write-offs in the financial services sector, the
re-pricing of credit risk in the broadly syndicated credit market and the failure
of certain major financial institutions. Despite actions of the U.S. federal
government, these events have contributed to worsening general economic
conditions that are materially and adversely impacting the broader financial
and credit markets and reducing the availability of debt and equity capital for
the market as a whole. Reflecting the concern about the stability of the
financial markets generally and the strength of counterparties, many lenders
and institutional investors have reduced, and in some cases ceased to provide,
funding to borrowers. The resulting lack of available credit, lack of
confidence in the financial sector, increased volatility in the financial
markets and reduced business activity could materially and adversely affect our
business, financial condition, results of operations and our ability to obtain
and manage our liquidity.
 
We May Not Be Able to
Adequately Protect Our Intellectual Property Rights
 
We rely on a combination
of trademark, trade secret and copyright law and internal procedures and
nondisclosure agreements to protect our intellectual property. There can be no
assurance that our intellectual property rights can be successfully asserted in
the future or will not be invalidated, circumvented or challenged. In addition,
the laws of certain foreign countries in which our products may be produced or
sold do not protect our intellectual property rights to the same extent as the
laws of the United States. Failure to protect our proprietary information could
have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and
financial condition.
 
Self-Insurance
Plan Claims Could Materially Impact Our Results
 
The Company uses a
combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for the potential
liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability, property insurance,
director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability and employee
health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the risks that are retained
by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering historical claims
experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial
assumptions. Our results could be materially impacted by claims and other
expenses related to such plans if future occurrences and claims differ from
these assumptions and historical trends.
 
Changes
in Accounting Standards Could Materially Impact Our Results
 
Generally accepted
accounting principles and related accounting pronouncements, implementation
guidelines, and interpretations for many aspects of our business, such as
accounting for insurance and self-insurance, inventories, goodwill and
intangible assets, store closures, leases, income taxes and share-based
payments, are highly complex and involve subjective judgments. Changes in these
rules or their interpretation could significantly change or add
significant volatility to our reported earnings without a comparable underlying
change in cash flow from operations.
 
Effective Tax Rate Changes and
Results of Examinations by Taxing Authorities Could Materially Impact Our
Results
 
Our future effective tax
rates could be adversely affected by the earnings mix being lower than
historical results in states or countries where we have lower statutory
rates and higher than historical results in states or countries where we
have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax
assets and liabilities, or by changes in tax laws or interpretations thereof.
In addition, we are subject to periodic audits and examinations by the Internal
Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other state and local taxing authorities. Our
results could be materially impacted by the determinations and expenses related
to these and other proceedings by the IRS and other state and local taxing
authorities.
 
Disruptions in Our Information
Systems Could Harm Our Ability to Run Our Business.
 
We rely extensively on
information systems for point-of-sale processing in our stores, supply chain,
financial reporting, human resources and various other processes and
transactions. Our information systems are subject to damage or interruption
from power outages, computer and telecommunications failures, computer viruses,
security breaches, including breaches of our transaction processing or other
systems that could result in the compromise of confidential customer data,
catastrophic events, and usage errors by our team members. If our systems are
breached, damaged or cease to function properly, we may have to make a
significant investments to fix or replace them, suffer interruptions in our
operations, face costly litigation, and our reputation with our customers may
be harmed. Any material interruption in our computer operations may have a
material adverse effect on our business or results of operations.
 
21





Table
of Contents
 
Failure
of Our Internal Control over Financial Reporting Could Materially Impact Our
Business and Results
 
The Company’s management
is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting. An internal control system, no matter how well designed
and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the
objectives of the control system are met. Further, the design of a control
system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the
benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. Because of the
inherent limitations in all internal control systems, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Any failure to
maintain an effective system of internal control over financial reporting could
limit our ability to report our financial results accurately and timely or to
detect and prevent fraud, and could expose us to litigation or adversely affect
the market price of our common stock.
 
Item 1B.              Unresolved
Staff Comments.
 
On February 15, 2008, the Company received a letter from the Staff
of the SEC’s Division of Corporation Finance as part of its review of the
Company’s Form 10-K filed on November 29, 2007. The Company responded
to that letter, which has been followed by a series of new letters and comments
from the Staff and Company responses. Many of the Staff’s comments have been
resolved. Following are three of the remaining unresolved comments that have
evolved since the Company received the initial comment letter from the Staff in
February 2008 or represent new comments from the Staff received as
recently as August 2008.
 
One comment relates to the Company’s testing for goodwill impairment
under SFAS No. 142, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets.” The Company
tests for goodwill impairment on a company-wide basis, as a single reporting
unit. Based on the results of its impairment testing, the Company determined
that there was no impairment of goodwill during fiscal year 2008. Application
of alternative assumptions and definitions, such as reviewing goodwill for
impairment at a different organizational level, could produce significantly different
results.
 
Another comment relates to the Company’s determination that it has a
single operating segment, and that its 11 geographic regions are not separate
operating segments requiring additional segment-level financial disclosure. The
Company made this determination in accordance with SFAS No. 131, “Disclosures
about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information.”
 
A third comment relates to the categorization of products in connection
with disclosure of the amount or percentage of total revenue contributed by
each class of similar products as required by Item 101(c)(1)(I) of
Regulation S-K.
 
The Company will continue to work with the Staff to resolve outstanding
comments.
 
22





Table
of Contents
 
Item 2.           Properties.
 
As of September 28,
2008, we operated 275 stores: 264 stores in 38 U.S. states and the District of
Columbia; six stores in Canada; and five stores in the United Kingdom. This
includes 55 stores acquired from Wild Oats Markets, Inc. on August 28,
2007: 52 stores in 20 U.S. states and three stores in Canada. We own 10 stores,
three distribution facilities and land for one store in development, including
the adjacent property. We also own a store and a building on leased land, which
is leased to third parties, and have five stores in development on leased land.
All other stores, distribution centers, bakehouses and administrative
facilities are leased, with expiration dates ranging from one to 35 years. We
have options to renew most of our leases in five-year increments with renewal
periods ranging from five to 50 years. In addition, as of September 28,
2008, we had 36 leased properties that are not being utilized in current
operations, of which 30 are related to Wild Oats, with expiration dates ranging
from one to 16 years. We are actively negotiating to sublease or terminate
leases related to these locations.
 
The following table shows
the number of our stores by state, the District of Columbia, Canada and the
United Kingdom as of September 28, 2008:
 



 


 


Number


 


 


 


Number


 


 


 


Number




Location


 


of Stores


 


Location


 


of Stores


 


Location


 


of Stores




Alabama


 


1


 


Kentucky


 


2


 


Ohio


 


6




Arkansas


 


1


 


Louisiana


 


3


 


Oklahoma


 


1




Arizona


 


7


 


Maine


 


1


 


Oregon


 


6




California


 


51


 


Maryland


 


7


 


Pennsylvania


 


7




Canada


 


6


 


Massachusetts


 


19


 


Rhode Island


 


3




Colorado


 


18


 


Michigan


 


5


 


South Carolina


 


2




Connecticut


 


5


 


Minnesota


 


2


 


Tennessee


 


3




District of Columbia


 


3


 


Missouri


 


3


 


Texas


 


14




Florida


 


14


 


Nebraska


 


1


 


United Kingdom


 


5




Georgia


 


7


 


Nevada


 


4


 


Utah


 


4




Hawaii


 


1


 


New Jersey


 


9


 


Virginia


 


9




Illinois


 


16


 


New Mexico


 


5


 


Washington


 


5




Indiana


 


2


 


New York


 


8


 


Wisconsin


 


2




Kansas


 


2


 


North Carolina


 


5


 


 


 


 



 
Item 3.           Legal Proceedings.
 
From time to time we are
a party to legal proceedings including matters involving personnel and
employment issues, personal injury, intellectual property, real estate and
other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. The Company has
established loss provisions for matters in which losses are probable and the
amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. The Company does not believe that
any of these proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business, either
alone or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s
results of operations, cash flows or financial condition.
 
The Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”) has resumed its administrative action challenging the Company’s August 28, 2007 acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. On July 29, 2008, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit reversed the August 16, 2007 decision of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia which had denied the FTC’s motion for a preliminary injunction against the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets by Whole Foods Market, and remanded the case to the District Court for further proceedings consistent with the appellate decision. On the same day, the Court of Appeals issued an Order directing the Clerk of the Court of Appeals to withhold issuance of the mandate in the case until seven days after disposition of any timely petition for rehearing or petition for rehearing en banc. On August 26, 2008, Whole Foods Market filed a petition for a rehearing en banc with the Court of Appeals, to which the Court of Appeals ordered the FTC to respond. The FTC opposed the petition. Subsequent to year end, on October 6, 2008, Whole Foods Market filed a motion for leave to file a reply to the FTC’s opposition to the petition for rehearing en banc, which motion the FTC also opposed. On November 21, 2008 the Court of Appeals denied Whole Foods Market’s petition for a rehearing en banc, amended its earlier opinion and remanded the case to the District Court for further proceedings. On remand the FTC may renew its motion for some preliminary injunctive relief pending resolution of the administrative action.
 
On August 8, 2008,
the FTC issued an Order rescinding the stay of its administrative proceeding
against Whole Foods Market. The FTC had previously filed a complaint commencing
its administrative proceeding on June 28, 2007 but had stayed the
proceeding on its own motion pending resolution of the federal court
proceedings related to the merger. On September 8, 2008, the FTC issued an
Amended Compliant in its administrative proceedings changing the relevant
geographic markets and changing the notice of contemplated
relief indicating that, should the FTC prevail in its 
 
23





Table
of Contents
 
administrative
proceeding, it would seek relief against Whole Foods
Market, which could include (i) an order preventing Whole Foods from
consolidating any Wild Oats stores into the Whole Foods system to the extent
such consolidation has not occurred at the time of the Commission’s decision; (ii) an
order preventing Whole Foods from selling or disposing of any owned or leased
property that had been used as a Wild Oats store in any geographic market, or a
Whole Foods store in any relevant geographic market; (iii) an order
preventing Whole Foods from discontinuing the use of the Wild Oats name at any
store being operated as Wild Oats at the time of the Commission’s decision; (iv) re-establishment
of Wild Oats stores, with Whole Foods stores added as necessary, along with any
associated or necessary assets in a manner that creates a group or system of
stores that may be available for divestiture, including, but not limited to,
re-opening closed Wild Oats stores, re-naming Wild Oats stores that had been
changed to the Whole Foods name, reversing any consolidation of Wild Oats
stores into the Whole Foods system and re-establishing the Wild Oats system,
and re-establishing Wild Oats’ distribution arrangements, private label
products and supplier relationships; (v) the divestiture of Wild Oats
stores, and Whole Foods stores, and any other associated or necessary assets,
including the Wild Oats name, distribution systems or assets, and supplier
relationships, in a manner that restores Wild Oats as a viable, independent
competitor in the relevant markets, with the ability to offer such services as
Wild Oats had offered prior to its acquisition by Whole Foods; (vi) maintenance
of the Wild Oats stores pending divestiture, including operating the stores in
the ordinary course and maintaining the inventory of the stores, the hours of
operation of the stores and of each department in the stores; (vii) appointment
of a monitor, or a divestiture trustee, to assure that the Wild Oats, Whole
Foods, and related assets are re-established and divested within the time set
forth in the Commission’s decision; (viii) a requirement that, for a
period of time, Whole Foods provide prior notice to the Commission of
acquisitions, mergers, consolidations, or any other combinations of its
operations with any other company providing the operation of premium and
natural organic supermarkets; (ix) a requirement for Whole Foods to file
periodic compliance reports with the Commission; and (x) any other relief
appropriate to correct or remedy the anticompetitive effects of the transaction
or to restore Wild Oats as a viable, independent competitor in the relevant
markets.
 
On September 10,
2008, the FTC issued the Scheduling Order for this matter. The trial is
scheduled to commence on February 16, 2009 and will take no more than
thirty full trial days. Subsequent to year end, on October 20, 2008, the
FTC designated Acting Chief Administrative Law Judge D. Michael Chappell as the
Administrative Law Judge for this matter.
 
Subsequent to year end,
on October 27, 2008, Whole Foods Market was served with the complaint
in Kottaras v. Whole Foods Market, Inc., a putative class action filed in
the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, seeking treble
damages, equitable, injunctive, and declaratory relief and alleging that the
acquisition and merger between Whole Foods Market and Wild Oats violates
various provisions of the federal antitrust laws.
 
Whole Foods Market cannot
at this time predict the likely outcome of these judicial and administrative
proceedings or estimate the amount or range of loss or possible loss that may
arise from them. Litigation is inherently unpredictable, and the outcome in any
of these proceedings, individually or collectively, could have a material
adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. Therefore,
we could be subject to judgments or enter into settlements of claims which
individually or collectively affect our operating results or cash flow in a
particular period.
 
Item 4.           Submission of Matters
to a Vote of Security Holders.
 
Not applicable.
 
24





Table of Contents
 
PART II
 
Item 5.    Market for Registrant’s Common Equity,
Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
 
Whole Foods Market’s
common stock is traded on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “WFMI.”
 
The Company was added to
Standard & Poor’s S&P 500 index in December 2005.
 
The following sets forth
the intra-day quarterly high and low sale prices of the Company’s common stock
for fiscal years 2008 and 2007:
 



 


 


High


 


Low


 




2008


 


 


 


 


 




October 1,
  2007 to January 20, 2008


 


$


53.65


 


$


34.37


 




January 21,
  2008 to April 13, 2008


 


42.48


 


29.99


 




April 14,
  2008 to July 6, 2008


 


36.03


 


22.63


 




July 7,
  2008 to September 28, 2008


 


24.22


 


17.37


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




2007


 


 


 


 


 




September 25,
  2006 to January 14, 2007


 


$


66.25


 


$


45.27


 




January 15,
  2007 to April 8, 2007


 


52.43


 


42.13


 




April 9,
  2007 to July 1, 2007


 


48.06


 


37.96


 




July 2,
  2007 to September 30, 2007


 


49.49


 


36.00


 



 
As of November 21,
2008, there were 1,635 holders of record of Whole Foods Market’s common stock,
and the closing stock price was $8.19.
 
Following is a
summary of dividends declared in fiscal years 2008 and 2007 (in thousands,
except per share amounts):
 



Date of
  Declaration


 


Dividend
  per Share


 


Date of
  Record


 


Date of
  Payment


 


Total
  Amount


 




Fiscal
  year 2008:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




November 20,
  2007


 


$


0.20


 


January 11, 2008


 


January 22, 2008


 


$


27,901


 




March 10,
  2008


 


0.20


 


April 11, 2008


 


April 22, 2008


 


28,041


 




June 11,
  2008


 


0.20


 


July 11, 2008


 


July 22, 2008


 


28,057


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Fiscal
  year 2007:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




September 27,
  2006


 


$


0.15


 


October 13, 2006


 


October 23, 2006


 


$


20,971


 




November 2,
  2006


 


0.18


 


January 12, 2007


 


January 22, 2007


 


25,303


 




March 5,
  2007


 


0.18


 


April 13, 2007


 


April 24, 2007


 


25,448


 




June 5,
  2007


 


0.18


 


July 13, 2007


 


July 24, 2007


 


25,019


 




September 20,
  2007


 


0.18


 


October 12, 2007


 


October 23, 2007


 


25,071


 



 
On August 5, 2008,
the Company announced that its Board of Directors suspended the Company’s
quarterly cash dividend to common shareholders for the foreseeable future.
 
On July 31, 2008,
the Company’s Board of Directors approved a $100 million increase in the
Company’s stock repurchase program, bringing the total authorization to $400
million through November 8, 2009 and the current remaining authorization
to approximately $200 million. At September 30, 2007, the Company held in
treasury approximately 4.5 million shares of common stock, totaling approximately
$200 million. During the first quarter of fiscal year 2008, the Company retired
all shares held in treasury. The specific timing and repurchase of future
amounts will vary based on market conditions, securities law limitations and
other factors and will be made using the Company’s available resources. The
repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without prior
notice.
 
25





Table of
Contents
 
The
following table summarizes information about our Company’s equity compensation
plans by type as of September 28, 2008 (in thousands, except per share
amounts):
 



Plan Category 


 


Options
  Outstanding


 


Weighted
  Average
  Exercise Price


 


Options
  Available
  for Future
  Issuance


 




Approved by
  security holders


 


17,430


 


$


48.64


 


4,537


 




Not approved by
  security holders


 


—


 


—


 


—


 




Total


 


17,430


 


$


48.64


 


4,537


 



 
On November 5, 2008,
the Company announced an agreement to sell Series A Preferred Stock due
2020 to Green Equity Investors V, L.P., an affiliate of Leonard Green &
Partners, L.P., for $425 million. At the time of the announcement, this equated
to an ownership interest, assuming conversion of the preferred stock to common
stock, in the Company of approximately 17%. The preferred stock has an 8%
dividend, payable quarterly in cash or by increasing the liquidation
preference, and is convertible under certain circumstances to common stock at
an initial conversion price of $14.50 per share. The closing and funding of the
transaction is subject to certain customary closing conditions, including the
receipt of customary regulatory approvals. There can be no assurance that these
approvals will be received.
 
26





Table of
Contents
 
Item 6.    Selected
Financial Data.
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Summary Financial Information
(In
thousands, except per share amounts and operating data)
 
The following selected
financial data are derived from the Company’s consolidated financial statements
and should be read in conjunction with “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
 


 

 


 


Sept. 28,
  2008


 


Sept. 30,
  2007


 


Sept. 24,
  2006


 


Sept. 25,
  2005


 


Sept. 26,
  2004


 

 


 

Consolidated
  Statements of Operations Data (1)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 


 

Sales


 


$


7,953,912


 


$


6,591,773


 


$


5,607,376


 


$


4,701,289


 


$


3,864,950


 

 


 

Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


5,247,207


 


4,295,170


 


3,647,734


 


3,052,184


 


2,523,816


 

 


 

Gross profit


 


2,706,705


 


2,296,603


 


1,959,642


 


1,649,105


 


1,341,134


 

 


 

Direct store
  expenses


 


2,107,940


 


1,711,229


 


1,421,968


 


1,223,473


 


986,040


 

 


 

General and
  administrative expenses


 


270,428


 


217,743


 


181,244


 


158,864


 


119,800


 

 


 

Pre-opening
  expenses


 


55,554


 


59,319


 


32,058


 


33,856


 


17,464


 

 


 

Relocation,
  store closure, and lease termination costs


 


36,545


 


10,861


 


5,363


 


3,179


 


1,184


 

 


 

Operating income


 


236,238


 


297,451


 


319,009


 


229,733


 


216,646


 

 


 

Interest expense


 


(36,416


)


(4,208


)


(32


)


(2,223


)


(7,249


)

 


 

Investment and
  other income


 


6,697


 


11,324


 


20,736


 


9,623


 


6,456


 

 


 

Income before income
  taxes


 


206,519


 


304,567


 


339,713


 


237,133


 


215,853


 

 


 

Provision for
  income taxes


 


91,995


 


121,827


 


135,885


 


100,782


 


86,341


 

 


 

Net income


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 


$


203,828


 


$


136,351


 


$


129,512


 

 


 

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 


 

Basic earnings
  per share


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.30


 


$


1.46


 


$


1.05


 


$


1.06


 

 


 

Weighted average
  shares outstanding


 


139,886


 


140,088


 


139,328


 


130,090


 


122,648


 

 


 

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 


 

Diluted earnings
  per share


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.29


 


$


1.41


 


$


0.99


 


$


0.99


 

 


 

Weighted average
  shares outstanding, diluted basis


 


140,011


 


141,836


 


145,082


 


139,950


 


135,454


 

 


 

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 


 

Dividends
  declared per share


 


$


0.60


 


$


0.87


 


$


2.45


 


$


0.47


 


$


0.30


 

 


 

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 


 

Consolidated
  Balance Sheets Data


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 


 

Net working
  capital


 


$


(43,571


)


$


(104,364


)


$


114,211


 


$


254,146


 


$


151,147


 

 


 

Total assets


 


3,380,736


 


3,213,128


 


2,042,996


 


1,889,296


 


1,521,006


 

 


 

Long-term debt
  (including current maturities)


 


929,170


 


760,868


 


8,655


 


18,864


 


170,743


 

 


 

Shareholders’
  equity


 


1,506,024


 


1,458,804


 


1,404,143


 


1,365,676


 


949,638


 

 


 

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 


 

Operating
  Data


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 


 

Number of stores
  at end of fiscal year


 


275


 


276


 


186


 


175


 


163


 

 


 

Average store
  size (gross square footage)


 


36,000


 


34,000


 


34,000


 


33,000


 


32,000


 

 


 

Average weekly
  sales per store


 


$


570,000


 


$


617,000


 


$


593,000


 


$


537,000


 


$


482,000


 

 


 

Comparable store
  sales increase (2)


 


4.9


%


7.1


%


11.0


%


12.8


%


14.9


%

 


 

Identical store
  sales increase (2)


 


3.6


%


5.8


%


10.3


%


11.5


%


14.5


%

 



(1)


 


Fiscal
  years 2008, 2006, 2005 and 2004 were 52-week years and fiscal year 2007 was a
  53-week year.




(2)


 


Sales
  of a store are deemed to be “comparable” commencing in the fifty-third full
  week after the store was opened or acquired. Identical store sales exclude
  sales for remodels with expansions of square footage greater than 20% and
  relocations. Stores closed for eight or more days are excluded from the
  comparable and identical store base in the first fiscal week of closure until re-opened for a
  full fiscal week.


























 
27





Table of
Contents
 
Item 7.    Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
 
General
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
and its consolidated subsidiaries own and operate the largest chain of natural
and organic foods supermarkets. Our Company mission is to promote vitality and
well-being for all individuals by supplying the highest quality, most wholesome
foods available. Through our growth, we have had a significant and positive
impact on the natural and organic foods movement throughout the United States,
helping lead the industry to nationwide acceptance. We opened our first store
in Texas in 1980 and, as of September 28, 2008, we operated 275 stores:
264 stores in 38 U.S. states and the District of Columbia; six stores in
Canada; and five stores in the United Kingdom. We have one operating segment,
supermarkets emphasizing natural and organic foods.
 
Effective
August 28, 2007, the Company completed
the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets, Inc. (“Wild Oats”), in a cash tender
offer of $18.50 per share, or approximately $565 million plus the assumption of
approximately $148 million in existing debt. At the date of acquisition, Wild
Oats had 109 stores in 23 states and British Columbia, Canada operating under
four banners: Wild Oats Marketplace nationwide, Henry’s Farmers Market (“Henry’s”)
in Southern California, Sun Harvest in Texas, and Capers Community Market in
British Columbia. In connection with the acquisition of Wild Oats, the Company
separately entered into an agreement to sell certain assets and liabilities,
consisting primarily of fixed assets, inventories and operating leases, related
to all 35 Henry’s and Sun Harvest stores and a related distribution center.
This sale was completed effective September 30, 2007 and the Company
received net proceeds totaling approximately $164 million in fiscal year 2008.
As of September 28, 2008, the Company had closed 19 Wild Oats stores and
had 55 continuing Wild Oats stores, of which 45 had been rebranded as Whole
Foods Market stores. The Company currently intends to close one additional
store and relocate an additional three stores as existing Whole Foods Market
sites in development open through fiscal year 2010. The Company has made
investments to raise the Wild Oats stores up to our high standards, including
investments in repairs and maintenance of the stores, lower prices, an expanded
perishables offering and increased labor. Wild Oats results of operations are
included in our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the period beginning August 28,
2007 through September 30, 2007 and for the fiscal year ended September 28,
2008.
 
Our
results of operations have been and may continue to be materially affected by
the timing and number of new store openings. Stores typically open within 24
months after entering the store development pipeline. New stores generally
become profitable during their first year of operation; although some new
stores may incur operating losses for the first several years of operation.
 
Sales
of a store are deemed to be comparable commencing in the fifty-third full week
after the store was opened or acquired. Stores acquired from Wild Oats entered
the comparable store sales base effective the fifty-third full week following
the date of the merger. Identical store sales exclude sales from relocated
stores and remodeled stores with expansions of square footage greater than 20%
until the fifty-third full week after the store is relocated or remodeled to
reduce the impact of square footage growth on the comparison. Stores closed for
eight or more days are excluded from the comparable and identical store base
from the first fiscal week of closure until
re-opened for a full fiscal week.
 
The
Company reports its results of operations on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year
ending on the last Sunday in September. Fiscal years 2008 and 2006 were 52-week
years and fiscal year 2007 was a 53-week year.
 
Overview
 
Whole Foods Market continues
to experience a challenging retail environment caused by a number of ongoing
factors including the general economic environment in the United States. Retail
sales in the United States declined in September 2008; the third
consecutive monthly decline and the first such consecutive three-month decline
in more than a decade. For the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, our comparable
store sales increased 0.4% compared to an increase of 8.2% for the same period
of the prior fiscal year, and identical store sales declined 0.5% compared to
an increase of 6.0% for the same period of the prior fiscal year. For the first
five weeks of the first quarter of fiscal year 2009, comparable store sales
decreased 2.1% versus a 9.0% increase for the same period of the prior year,
and identical store sales decreased 3.3% versus a 6.7% increase in the same
period of the prior year. We believe our customers remain committed to Whole
Foods Market, although the unrelenting negative economic news appears to be
shifting buying behavior to making fewer trips and to making more value
conscious decisions. For comparable stores, our transaction count declined
approximately 1.5% and average basket size increased approximately 2% in the
fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008.
 
The Whole Foods Market
brand stands for the highest quality, and over the last several years we have
worked hard to increase the value choices within our stores without sacrificing
our standards. Our “The Whole Deal” program, launched in July 2008, has
helped to highlight the values we offer within perishables. The program
includes a quarterly in-store guide providing
 
28





Table of Contents
 
specially priced product
discounts, money-saving coupons and tips, as well as budget recipes. We believe
that strengthening our value image throughout the store is the right strategy
over the short and long term, and we are making positive strides in differentiating
our product selection, with a major emphasis on expanding offerings under our
own label, our control brands and exclusive branded products. Our SKU count for
offerings under our own label increased 19% year over year to over 2,300. We
currently have over 300 exclusive-branded products across the center store.
 
On July 29, 2008,
the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
reversed the August 16, 2007 decision of the United States District Court
for the District of Columbia which had denied the Federal Trade Commission’s (“FTC”)
motion for a preliminary injunction against the acquisition of Wild Oats
Markets by Whole Foods Market, and remanded the case to the District Court for
further proceedings consistent with the appellate decision. On the same day,
the Court of Appeals issued an Order directing the Clerk of the Court of
Appeals to withhold issuance of the mandate in the case until seven days after
disposition of any timely petition for rehearing or petition for rehearing en
banc. On August 26, 2008, Whole Foods Market filed a petition for a
rehearing en banc with the Court of Appeals, to which the Court of Appeals
ordered the FTC to respond.  The FTC
opposed the petition.  On October 6,
2008, Whole Foods Market filed a motion for leave to file a reply to the FTC’s
opposition to the petition for rehearing en banc, which motion
the FTC also opposed. On November 21, 2008 the Court of Appeals denied
Whole Foods Market’s petition for a rehearing en banc, amended its earlier opinion
and remanded the case to the District Court for further proceedings.  On remand the FTC may renew its motion for
some preliminary injunctive relief pending resolution of the administrative
action.
 
On August 8, 2008,
the FTC issued an Order rescinding the stay of its administrative proceeding
against Whole Foods Market.  The FTC had
previously filed a complaint commencing its administrative proceeding on June 28,
2007 but had stayed the proceeding on its own motion pending resolution of the
federal court proceedings related to the merger. On September 8, 2008, the
FTC issued an Amended Complaint in its administrative proceeding changing the
relevant geographic markets involved and changing the notice of
contemplated relief it would seek if it prevails in the administrative trial.
On September 10, 2008, the FTC issued the Scheduling Order for this
matter. The trial is scheduled to commence on February 16, 2009 and will
take no more than thirty full trial days. On October 20, 2008, the FTC
designated Acting Chief Administrative Law Judge D. Michael Chappell as the
Administrative Law Judge for this matter. On October 27, 2008, Whole
Foods Market was served with the complaint in Kottaras v. Whole Foods Market, Inc.,
a putative class action filed in the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia, seeking treble damages, equitable, injunctive, and
declaratory relief and alleging that the acquisition and merger between Whole
Foods Market and Wild Oats violates various provisions of the federal antitrust
laws.
 
Whole Foods Market cannot
at this time predict the likely outcome of these judicial and administrative
proceedings or estimate the amount or range of loss or possible loss that may
arise from them. The Company had not accrued any loss related to the outcome of
these proceedings as of September 28, 2008.
 
On November 5, 2008,
the Company entered into an agreement to issue approximately 425,000 shares of Series A
8% Redeemable, Convertible Preferred Stock, $0.01 par value per share (“Series A
Preferred Stock”) to Green Equity Investors V, L.P., an affiliate of Leonard
Green & Partners, L.P., for $425 million. The Series A Preferred
Stock has an 8% dividend, payable quarterly in cash or by increasing the
liquidation preference, at the option of the Company, and will be convertible,
under certain circumstances, to common stock at an initial conversion rate of
$68.9655 per $1,000 of the liquidation preference, or an initial conversion
price of $14.50 per common share. The closing and funding of the transaction is
subject to certain customary closing conditions, including the receipt of
customary regulatory approvals. There can be no assurance that these approvals
will be received.
 
Fiscal
Year 2008 Executive Summary
 
Sales for fiscal year
2008 totaled approximately $8.0 billion, an increase of approximately 20.7%
over the prior year. Adjusted to reflect a 52-week period in fiscal year 2007,
sales increased 23.6% over the prior fiscal year. The ongoing weakness in the
economy and credit market turmoil continue to negatively impact consumer
confidence and spending, and Whole Foods Market is not immune to the country’s
economic issues. For the
fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, comparable store
sales increased 0.4% compared to an increase of 8.2% for the same period of the
prior fiscal year, and identical store sales declined 0.5% compared to an
increase of 6.0% for the same period of the prior fiscal year.
 
29





Table of
Contents
 
During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, the
Company:
 
·                  increased
store closure reserves for closed Wild Oats stores by a total of approximately
$14.7 million, or 27%, to approximately $64.4 million as a result of increased
estimated net lease obligations that were required due to the downturn in the
real estate market and economy in general;
 
·                  recognized
approximately $6.1 million in income tax expenses related to the repatriation
of approximately $59.8 million in cash from its Canadian subsidiary during the
fourth quarter;
 
·                  recorded
approximately $5.5 million in costs related to 13 lease terminations for stores
previously in development; and,
 
·                  recognized
approximately $2.5 million in legal costs related to the FTC proceedings.
 
Net income for fiscal
year 2008 totaled approximately $114.5 million, and diluted earnings per share
totaled $0.82.
 
Our capital expenditures
for fiscal year 2008 totaled approximately $522.0 million, of which
approximately $357.5 million was for new store development and approximately
$164.5 million was for remodels and other additions. We opened 20 new stores
during fiscal year 2008 and we ended the fiscal year with 275 stores. The Company has reduced the number of stores
expected to open in fiscal year 2009 to approximately 15, and capital
expenditures for fiscal year 2009 are expected to be in the range of $400
million to $450 million.
 
At the end of fiscal year
2008, the Company had outstanding debt totaling approximately $929.2 million,
including a $700 million term loan used to finance the Wild Oats acquisition,
$195 million in borrowings on the Company’s revolving line of credit,
approximately $19.0 million in capital lease obligations, an interest rate swap
liability totaling approximately $12.5 million and approximately $2.7 million
in convertible debentures.
 
The Company paid
quarterly cash dividends totaling approximately $109.1 million during fiscal
year 2008. During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, the Company’s Board
of Directors suspended the quarterly cash dividend for the foreseeable future.
 
Results
of Operations
 
The following table sets
forth the statements of operations data of Whole Foods Market expressed as a
percentage of total sales for the fiscal years indicated:
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%




Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


66.0


 


65.2


 


65.1


 




Gross profit


 


34.0


 


34.8


 


34.9


 




Direct store
  expenses


 


26.5


 


26.0


 


25.4


 




General and
  administrative expenses


 


3.4


 


3.3


 


3.2


 




Pre-opening
  expenses


 


0.7


 


0.9


 


0.6


 




Relocation,
  store closure and lease termination costs


 


0.5


 


0.2


 


0.1


 




Operating income


 


3.0


 


4.5


 


5.7


 




Interest expense


 


(0.5


)


(0.1


)


—


 




Investment and
  other income


 


0.1


 


0.2


 


0.4


 




Income before
  income taxes


 


2.6


 


4.6


 


6.1


 




Provision for
  income taxes


 


1.2


 


1.8


 


2.4


 




Net income


 


1.4


%


2.8


%


3.6


%



 
Figures
may not sum due to rounding.
 
Sales
 
Sales totaled approximately $7.95 billion, $6.59
billion and $5.61 billion in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively,
representing increases of 20.7%, 17.6% and 19.3% over the previous fiscal
years, respectively. Adjusted to reflect a 52-week period in fiscal year 2007,
sales in fiscal years 2008 and 2007 increased 23.6% and 15.3% over the prior
fiscal year, respectively. Sales for all fiscal years shown reflect increases
due to new stores opened and acquired and comparable store sales increases.
Comparable store sales increased approximately 4.9%, 7.1% and 11.0% in fiscal
years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. As of September 28, 2008, there
were 261 locations in the comparable store base. The number of stores open or
acquired 52-weeks or less equaled 20, 102 and 14 at the end of fiscal years
2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The sales
 
30





Table
of Contents
 
increase contributed by stores open or acquired within
52-weeks or less totaled approximately $236.1 million, $421.8 million and
$212.6 million for fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Sales at
Wild Oats stores totaled approximately $743.4 million and $122.1 million during
fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively. Sales for fiscal year 2007 reflect
five weeks of sales from Wild Oats stores. Identical store sales increased
approximately 3.6%, 5.8% and 10.3% in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively. Identical
store sales in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006 exclude seven, six and two
store relocations, respectively, and three, three and one remodels with major
expansions, respectively. For the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, comparable
store sales increased 0.4% compared to an increase of 8.2% for the same period
of the prior fiscal year, and identical store sales declined 0.5% compared to
an increase of 6.0% for the same period of the prior fiscal year. The uncertain
and rapidly changing current economic environment makes it highly difficult to
forecast future results. Assuming no increase in comparable store sales
combined with the expectation of opening 15 new stores, of which seven will be
relocations, we estimate fiscal year 2009 sales would total approximately $8.3
billion.
 
Gross Profit
 
Gross profit
consists of sales less cost of goods sold and occupancy costs plus contribution
from non-retail distribution and food preparation operations. Gross profit
totaled approximately $2.71 billion, $2.30 billion and $1.96 billion in fiscal
years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Gross profit as a percentage of sales
was 34.0%, 34.8% and 34.9% in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
Factors contributing to the decrease in gross profit as a percentage of sales
in fiscal year 2008 compared to the prior fiscal years include higher utility
costs and property taxes as a percentage of sales and product cost increases
greater than the Company’s increases in average retail prices. Increases in
product costs from our suppliers and increasing occupancy costs may continue in
future periods, and to the extent those increases are not reflected in
increased retail prices or increased retail prices are delayed, our gross
profit will be adversely affected. Our gross profit may increase or decrease
slightly depending on the mix of sales from new stores or the impact of weather
or a host of other factors, including inflation. Relative to existing stores,
gross profit margins tend to be lower for new stores and increase as stores
mature, reflecting lower shrink as volumes increase, as well as increasing
experience levels and operational efficiencies of the store teams. We have many
buying initiatives in place that are benefiting our customers. Our strategy is
to be competitively priced on a market-by-market basis on commodity-type
products and on identical product brands in grocery; however, our perishables
may be priced at a premium to reflect the higher quality, broader selection,
and better customer service available in our produce, meat, seafood, bakery,
specialty and prepared foods departments.
 
Direct
Store Expenses
 
Direct store expenses
totaled approximately $2.11 billion, $1.71 billion and $1.42 billion in fiscal
years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Direct store expenses as a percentage
of sales was approximately 26.5%, 26.0% and 25.4% in fiscal years 2008, 2007
and 2006, respectively. Direct store expenses as a percentage of sales tends to
be higher for new stores and decrease as stores mature, reflecting increasing
operational productivity of the store teams. Increased direct store expenses as
a percentage of sales in fiscal year 2008 reflect higher depreciation costs as
a percentage of sales.
 
General
and Administrative Expenses
 
General and
administrative expenses totaled approximately $270.4 million, $217.7 million
and $181.2 million in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. General
and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales were 3.4%, 3.3% and 3.2%
in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The Company currently
expects general and administrative expenses in fiscal year 2009 to be
approximately 3.1% of sales. This excludes approximately $15 million to $20
million related to the FTC proceedings that the Company currently expects to
incur costs in fiscal year 2009, including approximately $8 million to $10
million in the first quarter and approximately $5 million to $7 million in the
second quarter.
 
Pre-opening
Expenses
 
Pre-opening
expenses include rent expense incurred during construction of new stores and
other costs related to new store openings, including costs associated with
hiring and training personnel, supplies and other miscellaneous costs. Rent
expense is generally incurred approximately nine months prior to a store’s
opening date. Other pre-opening expenses are incurred primarily in the 30 days
prior to a new store opening. The Company opened 20, 21 and 13 new store
locations during fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Pre-opening
expenses totaled approximately $55.6 million, $59.3 million and $32.1 million
in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Pre-opening expenses as a
percentage of sales were 0.7%, 0.9% and 0.6% in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively.
 
Relocation,
Store Closure and Lease Termination Costs
 
Relocation
costs consist of moving costs, estimated remaining lease payments, accelerated
depreciation costs, related asset impairment, and other costs associated with
replaced facilities. Store closure costs consist of estimated remaining net
lease payments, accelerated depreciation costs, related asset impairment, and
other costs associated with closed facilities. Lease termination costs consist
of estimated remaining net lease payments for terminated leases and idle
properties and associated asset impairments. The Company relocated or closed
21, five and three store locations during fiscal years 2008, 2007 and
 
31





Table of
Contents
 
2006,
respectively. Relocation, store closure and lease termination costs totaled
approximately $36.5 million, $10.9 million and $5.4 million in fiscal years
2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Relocation, store closure and lease
termination costs as a percentage of sales were 0.5%, 0.2% and 0.1% in fiscal
years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Relocation, store closure and lease
termination costs for fiscal year 2008 include charges recorded during the
fourth quarter totaling approximately $14.7 million to increase store closure
reserves for increased estimated net lease obligations for closed Wild Oats
stores and approximately $5.5 million
in costs related to 13 lease terminations for stores previously in development.
 
Interest Expense
 
Interest expense,
net of amounts capitalized, was approximately $36.4 million, $4.2 million and
$32,000 in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in net
interest expense in fiscal year 2008 over the prior fiscal years includes
interest expense on the $700 million term loan we entered into on August 28,
2007 to finance the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. The Company had $195
million and $17 million outstanding on its revolving line of credit at September 28,
2008 and September 30, 2007, respectively. Company made the final
principal payment of approximately $5.7 million to retire its senior notes on May 16,
2006. The Company expects interest expense, net of investment and other income,
to range from approximately $35 million to $40 million in fiscal year 2009.
 
Investment and Other Income
 
Investment and other
income includes investment gains and losses, interest income, rental income and
other income totaling approximately $6.7 million, $11.3 million and $20.7
million in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The decreases in
investment and other income in fiscal years 2008 and 2007 primarily resulted
from lower average investment balances. Investment and other income for fiscal
year 2006 includes approximately $2.1 million of insurance proceeds related to
Hurricane Katrina losses.
 
Income
Taxes
 
Our effective tax rate on
income was approximately 44.5% in fiscal year 2008 and approximately 40.0% in
fiscal years 2007 and 2006. The increase in our effective tax rate for fiscal
year 2008 resulted primarily from the repatriation of cash during the fourth
quarter. The Company expects it annualized effective tax rate for fiscal year
2009 to be in the range of 41% to 42%.
 
Share-Based
Payments
 
Share-based payment
expense before income taxes recognized during fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006
was approximately $10.5 million, $13.2 million and $9.4 million, respectively.
Share-based payment expense was included in the following line items on the
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


$


233


 


$


475


 


$


264


 




Direct store
  expenses


 


5,300


 


7,093


 


3,555


 




General and
  administrative expenses


 


4,972


 


5,607


 


5,613


 




Share-based
  payment expense before income taxes


 


10,505


 


13,175


 


9,432


 




Income tax
  benefit


 


(4,815


)


(4,114


)


(2,724


)




Net share-based
  payment expense


 


$


5,690


 


$


9,061


 


$


6,708


 



 
Liquidity and Capital Resources
 
We generated cash flows
from operating activities of approximately $325.8 million, $399.3 million and
$452.7 million in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Cash flows
from operating activities resulted primarily from our net income less non-cash
expenses, income tax benefits that resulted from the exercise of team member
stock options and changes in operating working capital.
 
Net cash used in
investing activities was approximately $365.1 million, $895.7 million and
$569.3 million for fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.  For fiscal year 2007, net cash used in
investing activities includes approximately $596.2 million paid for the
purchase of Wild Oats. Our principal historical capital requirements have been
the funding of the development or acquisition of new stores and acquisition of
property and equipment for existing stores. The required cash investment for
new stores varies depending on the size of the new store, geographic location,
degree of work performed by the landlord and complexity of site development
issues. Capital expenditures for fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006 totaled
approximately $522.0 million, $529.7 million and $340.2 million, respectively,
of which approximately $357.5 million, $389.3 million and $208.6 million,
respectively, was for new store development and approximately $164.5 million,
$140.3 million and $131.6 million, respectively, was for remodels and other
property, plant and equipment expenditures. For fiscal year 2009, the Company
expects capital expenditures to be in the range of approximately $400 million
to $450 million.
 
32





Table of Contents
 
The following table
provides information about the Company’s store development activities:
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Properties


 


Total


 




 


 


Stores Opened


 


Stores Opened


 


Tendered


 


Leases Signed


 




 


 


During Fiscal


 


During Fiscal


 


as of


 


as of


 




 


 


Year 2007


 


Year 2008


 


November 5, 2008


 


November 5, 2008


 




Number of stores
  (including relocations)


 


21


 


20


 


11


 


66


 




Number of
  relocations


 


5


 


6


 


2


 


13


 




Number of lease
  acquisitions, ground leases and owned properties


 


4


 


4


 


6


 


8


 




New areas


 


3


 


3


 


2


 


8


 




Average store
  size (gross square feet)


 


56,500


 


53,000


 


46,400


 


49,100


 




As a percentage
  of existing store average size


 


167


%


146


%


128


%


135


%




Total square
  footage


 


1,185,800


 


1,060,700


 


510,900


 


3,293,900


 




As a percentage
  of existing square footage


 


13


%


11


%


5


%


33


%




Average tender
  period in months


 


8.8


 


9.7


 


 


 


 


 




Average
  pre-opening expense per store


 


$


2.6 million


(1)


$


2.5 million


 


 


 


 


 




Average pre-opening
  rent per store


 


$


0.9 million


(1)


$


1.1 million


 


 


 


 


 




Average
  development cost


 


$


15.1 million


(1)


$


15.8 million


 


 


 


 


 




Average
  development cost per square foot


 


$


278


(1)


$


297


(2)


 


 


 


 



(1)Average pre-opening
and development costs exclude the Kensington store opened in London during
fiscal year 2007.
(2)Average development
costs exclude pre-opening and include estimated costs for stores not yet final.
 
The following
table provides information about the Company’s historical store growth:
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Stores at
  beginning of fiscal year


 


276


 


186


 


175


 




Stores opened


 


20


 


21


 


13


 




Acquired stores


 


—


 


109


 


1


 




Divested stores


 


—


 


(35


)


—


 




Relocations and
  closures


 


(21


)


(5


)


(3


)




Stores at end of
  fiscal year


 


275


 


276


 


186


 




Remodels with
  major expansions(1)


 


1


 


2


 


1


 




Total gross
  square footage at end of fiscal year


 


9,895,000


 


9,312,000


 


6,377,000


 



(1) Defined as remodels
with expansions of square footage greater than 20% completed during the fiscal
year.
 
The following table
provides additional information about the Company’s estimated store openings
for fiscal years 2009 through 2012, including four stores that have opened
during fiscal year 2009 through November 5, 2008, based on the Company’s
current development pipeline. These openings reflect estimated tender dates
which are subject to change and do not incorporate any potential new leases,
terminations or square footage reductions:
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Total


 


Average


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


New Store


 


New Store


 




 


 


Total


 


 


 


New


 


Square


 


Square


 




 


 


Openings


 


Relocations


 


Areas


 


Footage


 


Footage


 




Stores opened
  through November 5, 2008


 


4


 


2


 


0


 


200,800


 


50,200


 




Fiscal year 2009
  stores in development


 


11


 


5


 


1


 


621,500


 


56,500


 




Fiscal year 2010
  stores in development


 


17


 


0


 


4


 


686,300


 


40,400


 




Fiscal year 2011
  stores in development


 


19


 


4


 


1


 


884,000


 


46,500


 




Fiscal year 2012
  stores in development


 


19


 


4


 


2


 


1,045,800


 


55,000


 




Total (1)


 


70


 


15


 


8


 


3,438,400


 


49,100


 



(1) Total square
footage excludes three major expansions in development.
 
The Company expects total
pre-opening and relocation costs for fiscal year 2009 to range from
approximately $55 million to $60 million, of which approximately half relates
to pre-opening rent for stores scheduled to open during fiscal year 2009 and
beyond. These ranges are based on estimated tender dates which are subject to
change.
 
Net cash provided by
financing activities was approximately $69.8 million and $494.1 million in
fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively. Net cash used in financing activities
was approximately $189.7 million in fiscal year 2006. Proceeds from the
 
33





Table of Contents
 
exercise of stock options
by team members are driven by a number of factors, including fluctuations in
our stock price, and totaled approximately $18.0 million, $54.4 million, and
$222.0 million in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The higher
rate of stock option exercises in fiscal year 2006 resulted in part from the
accelerated vesting of stock options on September 22, 2005.
 
On August 28,
2007, the Company entered into a $700 million, five-year term loan agreement to
finance the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. The loan, which is secured by a
pledge of substantially all of the stock of our subsidiaries, bears interest at
our option of the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin or
LIBOR plus an applicable margin based on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P
rating. The interest period on LIBOR borrowings may range from one to six
months at our option. The Company recorded approximately $3.4 million in debt
origination fees for the term loan which are being amortized on a straight-line
basis over the life of the loan. During the first quarter of fiscal year 2008,
the Company entered into a three-year interest rate swap agreement with a
notional amount of $490 million to effectively fix the interest rate on $490
million of the term loan at 4.718%, excluding the applicable margin and
associated fees, to help manage exposure to interest rate fluctuations. The
Company had accumulated net derivative losses of approximately $7.6 million,
net of taxes, in other comprehensive income as of September 28, 2008,
related to this cash flow hedge. Hedge ineffectiveness was not material during
fiscal year 2008.
 
On August 28,
2007, we replaced our previous revolving credit facility with a new $250
million revolving line of credit that extends to 2012. During the third quarter
of fiscal year 2008, the Company exercised the accordion feature available
under the revolving credit facility to increase the aggregate commitment to
$350 million and amend certain debt covenants contained in the agreement. All outstanding
amounts borrowed under this agreement bear interest at our option of the ABR
plus an applicable margin or LIBOR plus an applicable margin based on the
Company’s Moody’s and S&P rating. Commitment fees on the undrawn amount,
reduced by outstanding letters of credit, are payable under this agreement. At September 28,
2008 and September 30, 2007, the Company had $195 million and $17 million,
respectively, drawn under this agreement. The amount available to the Company
under the agreement was effectively reduced to $75.9 million by outstanding
letters of credit totaling approximately $79.1 million and current borrowings
at September 28, 2008. Subsequent to the end of the fiscal year, the
Company repaid certain amounts outstanding under the line and increased letters
of credit outstanding. As of November 21, 2008, the Company had $169
million outstanding and approximately $101.9 million available on its revolving
credit facility.
 
The average
variable interest rate on the $700 million term loan, inclusive of the
applicable margin, was 5.715% during fiscal year 2008. The effective interest
rate on the $490 million interest rate swap, inclusive of the applicable
margin, was 5.780% during fiscal year 2008. The average variable interest rate
on the amounts outstanding under the revolving line of credit agreement,
inclusive of the applicable margin, was 5.259% during fiscal year 2008. A
summary of applicable interest rates as of the end of fiscal years 2008 and
2007 follows:
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 




Term loan
  agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin on non-swap portion of loan


 


2.469


%


5.179


%




Interest rate
  swap fixed interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


4.718


%


n/a


 




Applicable
  margin – LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.375


%


1.000


%




Applicable
  margin – ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.375


%


n/a


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




Line of credit
  agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


4.221


%


6.750


%




Applicable
  margin – LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.500


%


1.000


%




Applicable
  margin – ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.500


%


n/a


 




Commitment fee
  on undrawn amount


 


0.275


%


0.200


%



 
Interest paid
during fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006 totaled approximately $36.2 million,
$4.6 million and $0.6 million, respectively. The increase in interest paid in
fiscal year 2008 is due to interest costs associated with the $700 million term
loan agreement and interest costs associated with increased amounts outstanding
under the revolving line of credit. Interest paid in fiscal year 2007 includes
interest costs associated with the $700 million term loan agreement for the
period from August 28, 2007 through September 30, 2007. The Company
expects interest expense, net of investment and other income, to range from
approximately $35 million to $40 million in fiscal year 2009.
 
The term loan and
revolving credit agreements contain certain affirmative covenants including
maintenance of certain financial ratios and certain negative covenants
including limitations on additional indebtedness and payments as defined in the
agreement. At September 28, 2008, we were in compliance with all
applicable debt covenants.
 
34





Table of
Contents
 
Subsequent to the
end of fiscal year 2008, the margin applicable to our term loan increased to
0.75% and 1.75% on alternate base rate borrowings and LIBOR borrowings,
respectively, due to downgrades of our corporate credit ratings. Additionally,
the margins applicable to our revolving credit facility increased to 0.875% on
alternate base rate borrowings and 1.875% on LIBOR borrowings. These applicable
margins are currently the maximum allowed under these agreements. Currently the
Company has a Moody’s rating of Ba3 and S&P rating of BB-. These rating
changes also allow participating banks to obtain security interests in the
Company’s personal property, inventories, and other assets to collateralize
amounts outstanding under the term and revolving credit facilities. The
participating banks have informed the Company of their intent to obtain such
security interests. The collateral is subject to certain customary affirmative
covenants including the insurance of inventory and equipment and certain
negative covenants including limitations on subordination and sale of
additional collateral outside of the normal course of business.
 
We have
outstanding convertible subordinated debentures which had a carrying amount of
approximately $2.7 million and $24.5 million at September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007, respectively. The Company assumed convertible debentures totaling
approximately $115.0 million in the Wild Oats acquisition, of which
approximately $94.2 million was paid off during fiscal year 2007 and
approximately $21.8 million, which included a related conversion premium
totaling approximately $0.9 million, was paid off during fiscal year 2008. The
remaining Whole Foods Market debentures have an effective yield to maturity of
5% and a scheduled maturity date of March 2, 2018. The debentures are
convertible at the option of the holder, at any time on or prior to maturity,
unless previously redeemed or otherwise purchased. The debentures may be
redeemed at the option of the holder on March 2, 2013 at the issue price
plus accrued original discount to the date of redemption. Subject to certain
limitations, at our option, we may elect to pay this purchase price in cash,
shares of common stock or any combination thereof. The debentures may also be
redeemed in cash at the option of the holder if there is a change in control at
the issue price plus accrued original discount to the date of redemption. The
Company may redeem the debentures for cash, in whole or in part, at redemption
prices equal to the issue price plus accrued original discount to the date of
redemption. The debentures are subordinated in the right of payment to all
existing and future senior indebtedness. The debentures have a conversion rate
of 21.280 shares of Company common stock per $1,000 principal amount at
maturity, or approximately 91,000 shares and 97,000 shares at September 28,
2008 and September 30, 2007, respectively. Approximately $154,000 and $5.8
million of the carrying amount of the debentures were voluntarily converted by
holders to shares of Company common stock during fiscal years 2008 and 2007,
respectively. The Company sent a notice to holders on November 6, 2008
that the Company intends to redeem remaining debentures on December 8,
2008 at a redemption price equal to the issue price plus accrued original issue
discount totaling approximately $2.7 million.
 
On November 5, 2008,
the Company entered into an agreement to issue approximately 425,000 shares of Series A
8% Redeemable, Convertible Preferred Stock, $0.01 par value per share (“Series A
Preferred Stock”) to Green Equity Investors V, L.P., an affiliate of Leonard
Green & Partners, L.P., for $425 million. The Series A Preferred
Stock has an 8% dividend, payable quarterly in cash or by increasing the
liquidation preference, at the option of the Company, and will be convertible,
under certain circumstances, to common stock at an initial conversion rate of
$68.9655 per $1,000 of the liquidation preference, or an initial conversion
price of $14.50 per common share.  After
three years, the dividend will be reduced to: (i) 6% if the common stock
closes at or above $17.75 per share for at least 20 consecutive trading days,
or (ii) 4% if the common stock closes at or above $23.13 per share for at
least 20 consecutive trading days.  The
Company may redeem the Series A Preferred Stock after five years at a
premium of 4%, declining ratably to par by the eighth year. Additionally, at
any time, the Company may, upon 30 days notice, redeem the Series A
Preferred Stock if the common stock closes at or above $28.50 per share for at
least 20 consecutive trading days.  The
Company also has the option to convert the Series A Preferred Stock into
subordinated convertible notes having economic terms similar to the preferred
stock under certain circumstances. The closing and funding of the transaction
is subject to certain customary closing conditions, including the receipt of
customary regulatory approvals. There can be no assurance that these approvals
will be received.
 
The Company is
committed under certain capital leases for rental of certain equipment,
buildings and land. These leases expire or become subject to renewal clauses at
various dates through 2029. Capital leases totaling approximately $19.1 million
were assumed with the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets.
 
35





Table of Contents
 
The following table shows
payments due by period on contractual obligations as of September 28, 2008
(in thousands):
 



 


 


 


 


Less than 1


 


1-3


 


3-5


 


More than 5


 




 


 


Total


 


Year


 


Years


 


Years


 


Years


 




Long term debt
  obligations


 


$


897,698


 


$


—


 


$


—


 


$


897,698


 


$


—


 




Estimated
  interest on long term debt obligations


 


126,956


 


40,591


 


64,010


 


22,355


 


—


 




Capital lease
  obligations (including interest)


 


41,125


 


2,089


 


4,179


 


4,179


 


30,678


 




Operating lease
  obligations(1)


 


6,017,763


 


261,467


 


627,483


 


641,428


 


4,487,385


 




Total


 


$


7,083,542


 


$


304,147


 


$


695,672


 


$


1,565,660


 


$


4,518,063


 



(1)Amounts exclude
taxes, insurance and other related expense.
 
The Company adopted
Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Interpretation No. 48, “Accounting
for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109”
(“FIN 48”) on October 1, 2007, the first day of fiscal year 2008. The
amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits and related interest and penalties at
September 28, 2008 was approximately $26.8 million.  These amounts have been excluded from the
contractual obligations table because a reasonably reliable estimate of the
period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities cannot be
determined due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future
cash outflows associated with these liabilities.
 
We periodically make
other commitments and become subject to other contractual obligations that we
believe to be routine in nature and incidental to the operation of the
business. Management believes that such routine commitments and contractual
obligations do not have a material impact on our business, financial condition
or results of operations.
 
Following is a
summary of dividends declared in fiscal years 2008 and 2007 (in thousands,
except per share amounts):
 



Date of


 


Dividend


 


Date of


 


Date of


 


Total


 




Declaration


 


per Share


 


Record


 


Payment


 


Amount


 




Fiscal
  year 2008:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




November 20,
  2007


 


$


0.20


 


January 11, 2008


 


January 22, 2008


 


$


27,901


 




March 10,
  2008


 


0.20


 


April 11, 2008


 


April 22, 2008


 


28,041


 




June 11,
  2008


 


0.20


 


July 11, 2008


 


July 22, 2008


 


28,057


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Fiscal
  year 2007:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




September 27,
  2006


 


$


0.15


 


October 13, 2006


 


October 23, 2006


 


$


20,971


 




November 2,
  2006


 


0.18


 


January 12, 2007


 


January 22, 2007


 


25,303


 




March 5,
  2007


 


0.18


 


April 13, 2007


 


April 24, 2007


 


25,448


 




June 5,
  2007


 


0.18


 


July 13, 2007


 


July 24, 2007


 


25,019


 




September 20,
  2007


 


0.18


 


October 12, 2007


 


October 23, 2007


 


25,071


 



 
During the fourth quarter
of fiscal year 2008, the Company’s Board of Directors suspended the quarterly
cash dividend for the foreseeable future.
 
On July 31, 2008,
the Company’s Board of Directors approved a $100 million increase in the
Company’s stock repurchase program, bringing the total authorization to $400
million through November 8, 2009 and the current remaining authorization
to approximately $200 million. At September 30, 2007, the Company held in
treasury approximately 4.5 million shares of common stock.  The average price per share paid for shares
held in treasury at September 30, 2007 was $43.98, for a total of
approximately $200 million. During the first quarter of fiscal year 2008, the
Company retired all shares held in treasury. The specific timing and repurchase
of future amounts will vary based on market conditions, securities law
limitations and other factors and will be made using the Company’s available
resources. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time
without prior notice.
 
Our principal historical sources of liquidity have
been cash generated by operations, available cash and cash equivalents,
short-term investments and amounts available under our revolving line of
credit. There can be no assurance, however, that the Company will continue to
generate cash flows at or above current levels or that our revolving line of
credit and other sources of capital will be available to us in the future. On November 5,
2008, the Company announced an agreement to sell Series A Preferred Stock
for $425 million. We believe this investment, combined with cash generated by
operations, will give us the financial flexibility to manage through the
currently difficult economic times while continuing to prudently invest in our
long-term growth. Absent any significant change in market condition, we expect
planned expansion and other anticipated working capital and capital expenditure
requirements for the next twelve months will be funded by these sources.
 
36





Table of Contents
 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
 
Our off-balance sheet arrangements at September 28,
2008 consist of operating leases disclosed in the above contractual obligations
table and the undrawn portion of our revolving credit facility discussed in
Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements, “Long-Term Debt,” in “Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We have no other off-balance
sheet arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a material
current or future effect on our consolidated financial statements or financial
condition.
 
Critical Accounting Policies
 
The preparation of our
financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting
principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related
disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. Actual amounts may differ
from these estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on
various other assumptions and factors that we believe to be reasonable under
the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate the continued
appropriateness of our accounting policies and resulting estimates to make
adjustments we consider appropriate under the facts and circumstances.
 
We have chosen accounting
policies that we believe are appropriate to report accurately and fairly our
operating results and financial position, and we apply those accounting policies
in a consistent manner. Our significant accounting policies are summarized in
Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in “Item 8. Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data.” We believe that the following accounting
policies are the most critical in the preparation of our financial statements
because they involve the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments about
the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
 
Insurance and Self-Insurance
Liabilities
 
The Company uses a
combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for the potential
liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability, property insurance,
director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability and employee
health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the risks that are retained
by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering historical claims
experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial
assumptions. While we believe that our assumptions are appropriate, the
estimated accruals for these liabilities could be significantly affected if
future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical
trends.
 
We have not made any material changes in the
accounting methodology used to establish our insurance and self-insured
liabilities during the past three fiscal years.
 
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it
is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used
different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change.
A 10% change in our insurance and self-insured liabilities at September 28,
2008, would have affected net income by approximately $5.1 million for fiscal
year 2008.
 
Reserves for Closed Properties
 
The Company maintains reserves for retail stores and
other properties that are no longer being utilized in current operations. The
Company provides for closed property operating lease liabilities using a
discount rate to calculate the present value of the remaining noncancelable
lease payments and lease termination fees after the closing date, net of
estimated subtenant income. The closed property lease liabilities are expected
to be paid over the remaining lease terms, which generally range from one to 16
years. The Company estimates subtenant income and future cash flows based on
the Company’s experience and knowledge of the area in which the closed property
is located, the Company’s previous efforts to dispose of similar assets,
existing economic conditions and when necessary utilizes local real estate
brokers.
 
Adjustments to closed property reserves primarily
relate to changes in estimated subtenant income or actual exit costs differing
from original estimates. Adjustments are made for changes in estimates in the
period in which the changes become known.
 
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it
is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used
different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change.
A 10% change in our closed property reserves at September 28, 2008, would
have affected net income by approximately $4.0 million for fiscal year 2008.
 
Inventory Valuation
 
We value our inventories at the lower of cost or
market. Cost was determined using the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method for
approximately 94.0% and 81.7% of inventories at September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007, respectively. Under the LIFO method, the cost assigned to items sold is
based on the cost of the most recent items purchased. As a result, the costs of
the first items purchased remain in inventory and are used to value ending
inventory. The excess of estimated current costs
 
37





Table of Contents
 
over LIFO carrying value, or LIFO reserve, was
approximately $32.7 million and $20.0 million at September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007, respectively.  Costs for remaining
inventories are determined by the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method. Cost was
determined using the retail method and the item cost method for inventories in
fiscal years 2008 and 2007. Under the retail method, the valuation of
inventories at cost and the resulting gross margins are determined by counting
each item in inventory, then applying a cost-to-retail ratio for various
groupings of similar items to the retail value of inventories. Inherent in the
retail inventory method calculations are certain management judgments and
estimates which could impact the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as
the resulting gross margins. The item cost method involves counting each item
in inventory, assigning costs to each of these items based on the actual
purchase costs (net of vendor allowances) of each item and recording the actual
cost of items sold. The item cost method of accounting enables management to
more precisely manage inventory and purchasing levels when compared to the
retail method of accounting.
 
Our cost-to-retail ratios contain uncertainties
because the calculation requires management to make assumptions and to apply
judgment regarding inventory mix, inventory spoilage and inventory shrink. Because of the significance of the
judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different
amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying
circumstances were to change. A 10% difference in our cost-to-retail
ratios at September 28, 2008, would have affected net income by
approximately $3.4 million for fiscal year 2008.
 
Goodwill
and Intangible Assets
 
Goodwill consists of the
excess of cost of acquired enterprises over the sum of the amounts assigned to
identifiable assets acquired less liabilities assumed. Goodwill is reviewed for
impairment annually at the beginning of the Company’s fourth fiscal quarter, or
more frequently if impairment indicators arise, on a reporting unit level. We
allocate goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. We
determine fair value utilizing both a market value method and discounted
projected future cash flows compared to our carrying value for the purpose of
identifying impairment. Our annual impairment review requires extensive use of
accounting judgment and financial estimates. Application of alternative
assumptions and definitions, such as reviewing goodwill for impairment at a
different organizational level, could produce significantly different results. Because of the significance of the
judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different
amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying
circumstances were to change.
 
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Long-Lived
Assets to be Disposed of
 
We
evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be
recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a
comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted cash flows
expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be
impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which
the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets
to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair
value less costs to sell. Application of alternative assumptions, such as
changes in estimate of future cash flows, could produce significantly different
results. Because of the significant of the judgments and estimation processes,
it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used
different assumptions of if the underlying circumstances were to change.
 
Income Taxes
 
We recognize deferred
income tax assets and liabilities by applying statutory tax rates in effect at
the balance sheet date to differences between the book basis and the tax basis
of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured
using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which
those temporary differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets and
liabilities are adjusted to reflect changes in tax laws or rates in the period
that includes the enactment date. Significant accounting judgment is required
in determining the provision for income taxes and related accruals, deferred
tax assets and liabilities. In the ordinary course of business, there are
transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. In
addition, we are subject to periodic audits and examinations by the IRS and
other state and local taxing authorities. Although we believe that our
estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from these estimates.
 
On October 1, 2007,
the Company adopted FIN 48, which clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in
income tax positions recognized in the financial statements in accordance with
Statement of Financial Accounting Standard (“SFAS”) No. 109. Under FIN 48,
the Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if
it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on
examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the
position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a
position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater
than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. FIN 48 also
provides guidance on measurement, classification, interest and penalties
associated with tax positions, and income tax disclosures.
 
To
the extent we prevail in matters for which reserves have been established, or
are required to pay amounts in excess of our reserves, our effective income tax
rate in a given financial statement period could be materially affected. An
unfavorable tax
 
38





Table of Contents
 
settlement would require
use of our cash and would result in an increase in our effective income tax
rate in the period of resolution. A favorable tax settlement would be
recognized as a reduction in our effective income tax rate in the period of
resolution.
 
Share-Based Payments
 
The Company maintains
several share based incentive plans. We historically granted options to
purchase common stock under our 1992 Stock Option Plans, as amended.  In the 2007 annual shareholders’ meeting, our
shareholders approved a new plan, the Whole Foods Market 2007 Stock Incentive
Plan. Options are granted pursuant to this plan. Under both plans, options are
granted at an option price equal to the market value of the stock at the grant
date and are generally exercisable ratably over a four-year period beginning
one year from grant date and have a five-year term. The grant date is established
once the Company’s Board of Directors approves the grant and all key terms have
been determined. The exercise prices of our stock option grants are the closing
price on the grant date. Stock option grant terms and conditions are
communicated to team members within a relatively short period of time. Our
Company generally approves one primary stock option grant annually, occurring
during a trading window.
 
Our
Company offers a team member stock purchase plan to all full-time team members
with a minimum of 400 hours of service. Participating team members may purchase
our common stock through payroll deductions. At our 2007 annual meeting,
shareholders approved a new Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (“TMSPP”) which
became effective on April 1, 2007. The TMSPP replaces all previous stock
purchase plans and provides for a 5% discount on the shares purchase date
market value which meets the “Safe Harbor” provisions of SFAS No. 123R, “Share-Based
Payment,” as amended, and therefore is non-compensatory. As a result, no future
compensation expense will be recognized for our employee stock purchase plan.
Under the previous plans, participating team members could elect to purchase
unrestricted shares at 100% of market value or restricted shares at 85% of
market value on the purchase date.
 
Effective the beginning
of the first quarter of fiscal year 2006, the Company adopted the provisions of
SFAS No. 123R using the modified prospective transition method. Under this
method, prior periods were not restated. The Company uses the Black-Scholes
multiple option pricing model which requires extensive use of accounting
judgment and financial estimates, including estimates of the expected term team
members will retain their vested stock options before exercising them, the estimated
volatility of the Company’s common stock price over the expected term, and the
number of options that will be forfeited prior to the completion of their
vesting requirements. The related share-based payments expense is recognized on
a straight-line basis over the vesting period. Application of alternative
assumptions could produce significantly different estimates of the fair value
of share-based payments expense and consequently, the related amounts
recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The provisions of SFAS
No. 123R apply to new stock options and stock options outstanding, but not
yet vested, on the effective date.
 
SFAS No. 123R
requires the Company to value unvested stock options granted prior to its
adoption of SFAS No. 123 under the fair value method and expense these
amounts in the income statement over the stock option’s remaining vesting
period. The Company intends to keep its broad-based stock option program in
place, but also intends to limit the number of shares granted in any one year
so that annual earnings per share dilution from share-based payments expense
will not exceed 10%. SFAS No. 123R requires the Company to reflect the tax
savings resulting from tax deductions in excess of expense reflected in its
financial statements as a financing cash flow.
 
We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood
that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we
use to determine share-based payments expense. However, if actual results are
not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes
in share-based payments expense that could be material.
 
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it
is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used
different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change.
A 10% change in our share-based payments expense would have affected net income
by approximately $0.6 million for fiscal year 2008.
 
Recent
Accounting Pronouncements
 
In September 2006,
the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, “Fair Value Measurements,” as amended. SFAS No. 157
defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and
requires additional disclosures about fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157
applies to fair value measurements that are already required or permitted by
other accounting standards, except for measurements of share-based payments and
measurements that are similar to, but not intended to be, fair value and does
not change existing guidance as to whether or not an instrument is carried at
fair value. SFAS No. 157 is amended by FSP No. FAS 157-1, “Application
of FASB Statement No. 157 to FASB Statement No. 13 and Other
Accounting Pronouncements That Address Fair Value Measurements for Purposes of
Lease Classification or Measurement under Statement 13,” which excludes from
the scope of this provision arrangements accounted for under SFAS No. 13, “Accounting
for Leases.” The
 
39





Table of Contents
 
statement is further
amended by FSP No. FAS 157-3, “Determining the Fair Value of a Financial
Asset When the Market for That Asset Is Not Active,” which clarifies the
application of SFAS No. 157 in a market that is not active and provides an
example to illustrate key considerations in determining the fair value of a
financial asset when the market for that financial asset is not active. The
provisions of SFAS No. 157 are effective for the specified fair value
measures of financial assets and liabilities for financial statements issued
for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and interim periods
within those fiscal years for items within scope. SFAS No. 157 is
effective for the Company’s first quarter of fiscal year ending September 27,
2009. The company does not expect that the adoption of SFAS No. 157 will
have an impact on our consolidated financial statements.  The provisions of FSP No. FAS 157-2, “Effective
Date of FASB Statement No. 157,” are effective for the specified fair
value measures of nonfinancial assets and liabilities for financial statements
issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2008 and interim
periods within those fiscal years for items within scope. FSP No. FAS
157-2 is effective for the Company’s first quarter of fiscal year ending September 26,
2010. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of SFAS
No. 157 will have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In February 2007,
the FASB issued SFAS No. 159, “The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets
and Financial Liabilities, including an amendment of FASB Statement No. 115.”
SFAS No. 159 permits entities to choose to measure many financial
instruments and certain other items at fair value. SFAS No. 159
applies to all entities that elect the fair value option. However, the
amendment to SFAS No. 115 “Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and
Equity Securities” applies to all entities with available-for-sale and trading
securities. The provisions of SFAS No. 159 are effective for fiscal
years beginning after November 15, 2007. SFAS No. 159 is effective
for the Company’s fiscal year ending September 27, 2009. We are currently
evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of SFAS No. 159 will have
on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In December 2007,
the FASB issued SFAS No. 141R, “Business Combinations,” which replaces
SFAS No. 141, “Business Combinations,” and applies to all transactions or
other events in which an entity obtains control of one or more businesses,
including those sometimes referred to as “true mergers” or “mergers of equals”
and combinations achieved without the transfer of consideration. SFAS No. 141R
establishes principles and requirements for how the acquirer recognizes and
measures identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed, any noncontrolling
interest and goodwill acquired. The Statement also provides for disclosures to
enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and financial
effects of the business combination. The provisions of SFAS No. 141R are
effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008 and are
applied prospectively to business combinations completed on or after that date.
SFAS No. 141R is effective for the Company’s fiscal year ending September 26,
2010.  We will evaluate the impact, if
any, that the adoption of SFAS No. 141R could have on our consolidated
financial statements.
 
In December 2007,
the FASB issued SFAS No. 160, “Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated
Financial Statements – an amendment of ARB No. 51.” SFAS No. 160
establishes accounting and reporting standards for noncontrolling interests (“minority
interests”) in subsidiaries. Additionally, SFAS No. 160 amends certain
consolidation procedures contained in Accounting Reporting Bulletin No. 51
“Consolidated Financial Statements” to make them consistent with the
requirements of SFAS No. 141 “Business Combinations,” as revised. SFAS No. 160
clarifies that a noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary should be accounted
for as a component of equity separate from the parent’s equity. The provisions
of SFAS No. 160 are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within
those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2008 and are applied
prospectively, except for presentation and disclosure requirements, which will
apply retrospectively.  SFAS No. 160
is effective for the Company’s first quarter of fiscal year ending September 26,
2010. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of SFAS
No. 160 will have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In March 2008, the
FASB issued SFAS No. 161, “Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and
Hedging Activities – an amendment of FASB Statement No. 133.”  SFAS No. 161 amends and expands the
disclosure requirements of SFAS No. 133 “Accounting for Derivative
Instruments and Hedging Activities” by establishing, among other things, the
disclosure requirements for derivative instruments and hedging activities. This
Statement requires qualitative disclosures about objectives and strategies for
using derivatives, quantitative disclosures about fair value amounts of gains
and losses on derivative instruments, and disclosures about credit-risk-related
contingent features in derivative agreements. 
The provisions of SFAS No. 161 are effective for fiscal years and
interim periods beginning after November 15, 2008, with early application
encouraged.  In September 2008, the
FASB issued FSP No. FAS 133-1 and FIN 45-4, “Disclosures about Credit
Derivatives and Certain Guarantees: An Amendment of FASB Statement No. 133
and FASB Interpretation No. 45; and Clarification of the Effective Date of
FASB Statement No. 161,” which clarifies that the effective date applies
to any reporting period beginning after November 15, 2008. SFAS No. 161
is effective for the Company’s second quarter of fiscal year ending September 27,
2009. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of SFAS
No. 161 will have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In April 2008, the
FASB issued FSP No. FAS 142-3, “Determination of the Useful Life of
Intangible Assets.”  FSP No. FAS
142-3 amends the factors that should be considered in developing renewal or
extension assumptions used to determine the
 
40





Table of Contents
 
useful life of a
recognized intangible asset under SFAS No. 142, “Goodwill and Other
Intangible Assets.”  The intent of the
position is to improve the consistency between the useful life of a recognized
intangible asset under SFAS No. 142 and the period of expected cash flows
used to measure the fair value of the asset under SFAS No. 141R, and other
U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The provisions of FSP No. FAS
142-3 are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15,
2008.  FSP No. FAS 142-3 is
effective for the Company’s fiscal year ending September 26, 2010. We will
evaluate the impact, if any, that the adoption of FSP No. FAS 142-3 could
have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In May 2008, the
FASB issued FSP No. APB 14-1, “Accounting for Convertible Debt Instruments
That May Be Settled in Cash upon Conversion (Including Partial Cash Settlement).”
FSP No. APB 14-1 clarifies that convertible debt instruments that may be
settled in cash upon conversion (including partial cash settlement) are not
addressed by paragraph 12 of APB Opinion No. 14, “Accounting for
Convertible Debt and Debt Issued with Stock Purchase Warrants” and specifies
that such users should separately account for the liability and equity
components in a manner that will reflect the entity’s nonconvertible debt
borrowing rate when interest cost is recognized in subsequent periods. The
provisions of FSP No. APB 14-1 are effective for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2008, and interim periods within those fiscal years.
FSP No. APB 14-1 is effective for the Company’s first quarter of fiscal
year ending September 26, 2010. We are currently evaluating the impact, if
any, that the adoption of FSP No. APB 14-1 will have on our consolidated
financial statements.
 
Disclaimer
on Forward-Looking Statements
 
Except for the
historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this analysis
are forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including
but not limited to general business conditions, the timely development and
opening of new stores, the integration of acquired stores, the impact of competition
and changes in government regulation. For a discussion of these and other risks
and uncertainties that may affect our business, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
The Company does not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking
statements.
 
Item 7A.     Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures
About Market Risk.
 
We are exposed to interest rate changes and changes in
market values of our long-term debt. We do not use financial instruments for
trading or other speculative purposes. We are also exposed to foreign exchange
fluctuations on our foreign subsidiaries.
 
Interest Rate Risk
 
We seek to
minimize the risks from interest rate fluctuations through ongoing evaluation
of the composition of our long-term debt.
 
During fiscal year
2007, the Company entered into a $700 million, five-year term loan agreement to
finance the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. The loan bears interest at our
option of the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin or LIBOR
plus an applicable margin, based on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P ratings.
At September 28, 2008, the loan bore interest at LIBOR. Our term loans do
not give rise to significant fair value risk because they are variable interest
rate loans with revolving maturities which reflect market changes to interest
rates. During fiscal year 2008, the Company entered into a three-year interest
rate swap agreement with a notional amount of $490 million to fix the interest
rate at 4.718%, excluding applicable margin and associated fees, to help manage
our exposure to interest rate fluctuations.
 
During fiscal year
2007, the Company also entered into a $250 million revolving line of credit
that extends to 2012.  The credit
agreement contained an accordion feature, which the company exercised during
fiscal year 2008, to increase the revolving credit facility to $350 million.
All outstanding amounts under this agreement bear interest at our option of the
ABR plus an applicable margin or LIBOR plus an applicable margin, based on the
Company’s Moody’s and S&P ratings. At September 28, 2008, $26 million
was at ABR and $169 million was at LIBOR. Our line of credit borrowings do not
give rise to significant fair value risk because these borrowings have
revolving maturities.
 
41





Table of
Contents
 
Additional term
loan and line of credit information for September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007 are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 




Term loan
  agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding loan
  balance


 


$


700,000


 


$


700,000


 




Fair value of
  swap agreement (asset) liability


 


$


12,451


 


$


n/a


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin on non-swap portion of loan


 


2.469


%


5.179


%




Interest rate
  swap fixed interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


4.718


%


n/a


 




Applicable
  margin – LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.375


%


1.000


%




Applicable
  margin – ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.375


%


n/a


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




Line of credit
  agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding line
  of credit balance


 


$


195,000


 


$


17,000


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


4.221


%


6.750


%




Applicable
  margin – LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.500


%


1.000


%




Applicable
  margin – ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.500


%


n/a


 



 
Subsequent to the
end of fiscal year 2008 and due to a downgrade in our corporate credit rating
by Moody’s and S&P, the margin applicable to our term loan increased to
0.75% and 1.75% on ABR borrowings and LIBOR borrowings, respectively.
Additionally, the margin applicable to our revolving credit facility increased
to 0.875% and 1.875% on ABR borrowings and LIBOR borrowings, respectively.
These applicable margins are currently the maximum allowed under these
agreements. These ratings changes also allow participating banks to obtain
security interests in certain of the Company’s equipment, inventories,
accounts, intellectual property and other personal property assets to
collateralize amounts outstanding under the term loan and revolving credit
facility. Pursuant to this right, the participating banks have requested that
the Company execute related security agreements and the Company intends to
comply timely with this request.
 
Foreign
Currency Risk
 
The Company is
exposed to foreign currency exchange risk. We own and operate six supermarkets emphasizing
natural and organic foods in Canada and five supermarkets emphasizing natural
and organic foods in the United Kingdom. Sales made from the Canadian and
United Kingdom stores are made in exchange for Canadian dollars and Great
Britain pounds, respectively. Historically we have not hedged against this risk
because of the small amounts of funds at risk.
 
During fiscal year
2008, the Company repatriated approximately $59.8 million related to certain
foreign operations.  The remaining undistributed earnings related to those
foreign operations are considered permanently reinvested.  It is the
Company’s current intention to utilize those earnings in the foreign operations
for an indefinite period of time. The Company does not currently hedge against
the risk of exchange rate risk fluctuations.
 
42





Table
of Contents
 
Item 8.           Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
 



 


 


Page




 


 


Number




Report
  of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm


 


44




Report
  of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control over
  Financial Reporting


 


45




Consolidated
  Balance Sheets at September 28, 2008 and September 30, 2007


 


46




Consolidated
  Statements of Operations for the fiscal years ended September 28, 2008,
  September 30, 2007 and September 24, 2006 


 


47




Consolidated
  Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and Comprehensive Income for the fiscal
  years ended September 28, 2008, September 30, 2007 and
  September 24, 2006 


 


48 




Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal
  years ended September 28, 2008, September 30, 2007 and
  September 24, 2006 


 


49 




Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements


 


50



 
43





Table
of Contents
 
Whole
Foods Market, Inc.
Report of Independent Registered
Public Accounting Firm
 
To the Board of Directors
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Whole
Foods Market, Inc. (the “Company”) as of September 30, 2007 and September 28,
2008, and the related consolidated statements of operations, shareholders’
equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the three fiscal
years in the period ended September 28, 2008. These financial statements
are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
 
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present
fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of Whole
Foods Market, Inc. at September 30, 2007 and September 28, 2008,
and the consolidated results of their operations and their cash flows for each
of the three fiscal years in the period ended September 28, 2008, in
conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
 
As discussed in Note 2 to the financial statements, in 2008 the Company
changed its method of accounting for income tax uncertainties.
 
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the effectiveness of Whole
Foods Market, Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as of September 28,
2008, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework
issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
and our report dated November 24, 2008 expressed an unqualified opinion
thereon.
 
 
Austin, Texas
November 24, 2008
 
44





Table
of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
To the Board of Directors
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
 
We have audited Whole Foods Market, Inc.’s internal control over
financial reporting as of September 28, 2008, based on criteria
established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (the COSO criteria). Whole
Foods Market, Inc.’s management is responsible for maintaining effective
internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the
accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the company’s internal control
over financial reporting based on our audit.
 
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all
material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness
exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other
procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our
audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process
designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal
control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain
to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors
of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention
or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
In our opinion, Whole Foods Markets, Inc. maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of September 28,
2008, based on the COSO criteria.
 
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated balance
sheets of Whole Foods Market, Inc. as of September 30, 2007 and September 28,
2008, and the related consolidated statements of operations, shareholders’
equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the three fiscal
years in the period ended September 28, 2008 of Whole Foods Markets, Inc.
and our report dated November 24, 2008 expressed an unqualified opinion
thereon.
 
 
Austin, Texas
November 24, 2008
 
45





Table
of Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(In thousands)
September 28,
2008 and September 30, 2007
 



Assets


 


2008


 


2007


 




Current assets:


 


 


 


 


 




Cash and cash
  equivalents


 


$


30,534


 


$


—


 




Restricted cash


 


617


 


2,310


 




Accounts
  receivable


 


115,424


 


105,209


 




Proceeds
  receivable for divestiture


 


—


 


165,054


 




Merchandise
  inventories


 


327,452


 


288,112


 




Prepaid expenses
  and other current assets


 


68,150


 


40,402


 




Deferred income
  taxes


 


80,429


 


66,899


 




Total current
  assets


 


622,606


 


667,986


 




Property and
  equipment, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization


 


1,900,117


 


1,666,559


 




Goodwill


 


659,559


 


668,850


 




Intangible
  assets, net of accumulated amortization


 


78,499


 


97,683


 




Deferred income
  taxes


 


109,002


 


104,877


 




Other assets


 


10,953


 


7,173


 




Total assets


 


$


3,380,736


 


$


3,213,128


 



 



Liabilities
  and Shareholders’ Equity


 


2008


 


2007


 




Current
  liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 




Current
  installments of long-term debt and capital lease obligations


 


$


380


 


$


24,781


 




Accounts payable


 


183,134


 


225,728


 




Accrued payroll,
  bonus and other benefits due team members


 


196,233


 


181,290


 




Dividends
  payable


 


—


 


25,060


 




Other current
  liabilities


 


286,430


 


315,491


 




Total current
  liabilities


 


666,177


 


772,350


 




Long-term debt
  and capital lease obligations, less current installments


 


928,790


 


736,087


 




Deferred lease
  liabilities


 


199,635


 


152,552


 




Other long-term
  liabilities


 


80,110


 


93,335


 




Total
  liabilities


 


1,874,712


 


1,754,324


 




Shareholders’
  equity:


 


 


 


 


 




Common stock, no
  par value, 300,000 shares authorized; 140,286 and 143,787 shares issued,
  140,286 and 139,240 shares outstanding in 2008 and 2007, respectively 


 


1,066,180 


 


1,232,845 


 




Common stock in
  treasury, at cost


 


—


 


(199,961


)




Accumulated
  other comprehensive income


 


422


 


15,722


 




Retained
  earnings


 


439,422


 


410,198


 




Total
  shareholders’ equity


 


1,506,024


 


1,458,804


 




Commitments and
  contingencies


 


 


 


 


 




Total
  liabilities and shareholders’ equity


 


$


3,380,736


 


$


3,213,128


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of
these consolidated financial statements.
 
46





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(In
thousands, except per share amounts)
Fiscal
years ended September 28, 2008, September 30, 2007 and September 24,
2006
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Sales


 


$


7,953,912


 


$


6,591,773


 


$


5,607,376


 




Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


5,247,207


 


4,295,170


 


3,647,734


 




Gross profit


 


2,706,705


 


2,296,603


 


1,959,642


 




Direct store
  expenses


 


2,107,940


 


1,711,229


 


1,421,968


 




General and
  administrative expenses


 


270,428


 


217,743


 


181,244


 




Pre-opening
  expenses


 


55,554


 


59,319


 


32,058


 




Relocation,
  store closure and lease termination costs


 


36,545


 


10,861


 


5,363


 




Operating income


 


236,238


 


297,451


 


319,009


 




Interest expense


 


(36,416


)


(4,208


)


(32


)




Investment and
  other income


 


6,697


 


11,324


 


20,736


 




Income before
  income taxes


 


206,519


 


304,567


 


339,713


 




Provision for
  income taxes


 


91,995


 


121,827


 


135,885


 




Net income


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 


$


203,828


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings
  per share


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.30


 


$


1.46


 




Weighted average
  shares outstanding


 


139,886


 


140,088


 


139,328


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Diluted earnings
  per share


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.29


 


$


1.41


 




Weighted average
  shares outstanding, diluted basis


 


140,011


 


141,836


 


145,082


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dividends
  declared per share


 


$


0.60


 


$


0.87


 


$


2.45


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of
these consolidated financial statements.
 
47





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and Comprehensive Income
(In
thousands)
Fiscal
years ended September 28, 2008, September 30, 2007 and September 24,
2006
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Accumulated


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


Common


 


Other


 


 


 


Total


 




 


 


Shares


 


Common


 


Stock in


 


Comprehensive


 


Retained


 


Shareholders’


 




 


 


Outstanding


 


Stock


 


Treasury


 


Income
  (Loss)


 


Earnings


 


Equity


 




Balances at
  September 25, 2005


 


135,908


 


$


874,972


 


$


—


 


$


4,405


 


$


486,299


 


$


1,365,676


 




Net income


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


203,828


 


203,828


 




Foreign currency
  translation adjustments


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


2,494


 


—


 


2,494


 




Change in
  unrealized gain on investments, net of income taxes 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


76 


 


— 


 


76 


 




Comprehensive
  income


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


206,398


 




Dividends ($2.45
  per share)


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(340,867


)


(340,867


)




Issuance of
  common stock pursuant to team member stock plans 


 


5,510 


 


199,450 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


199,450 


 




Purchase of
  treasury stock


 


(2,005


)


—


 


(99,964


)


—


 


—


 


(99,964


)




Excess tax benefit
  related to exercise of team member stock options 


 


— 


 


59,096 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


59,096 


 




Share-based
  payments expense


 


—


 


9,432


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


9,432


 




Conversion of
  subordinated debentures


 


194


 


4,922


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


4,922


 




Balances at
  September 24, 2006


 


139,607


 


1,147,872


 


(99,964


)


6,975


 


349,260


 


1,404,143


 




Net income


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


182,740


 


182,740


 




Foreign currency
  translation adjustments


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


8,824


 


—


 


8,824


 




Change in
  unrealized loss on investments, net of income taxes 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


(77 


) 


— 


 


(77 


) 




Comprehensive
  income


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


191,487


 




Dividends ($0.87
  per share)


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(121,802


)


(121,802


)




Issuance of
  common stock pursuant to team member stock plans 


 


1,961 


 


52,925 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


52,925 


 




Purchase of
  treasury stock


 


(2,542


)


—


 


(99,997


)


—


 


—


 


(99,997


)




Excess tax
  benefit related to exercise of team member stock options 


 


— 


 


13,187 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


13,187 


 




Share-based
  payments expense


 


—


 


13,175


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


13,175


 




Conversion of
  subordinated debentures


 


214


 


5,686


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


5,686


 




Balances at
  September 30, 2007


 


139,240


 


1,232,845


 


(199,961


)


15,722


 


410,198


 


1,458,804


 




Net income


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


114,524


 


114,524


 




Foreign currency
  translation adjustments


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(7,714


)


—


 


(7,714


)




Change in
  unrealized loss on cash flow hedge instruments, net of income taxes 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


(7,586 


) 


— 


 


(7,586 


) 




Comprehensive
  income


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


99,224


 




Dividends ($0.60
  per share)


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


(84,012


)


(84,012


)




Issuance of
  common stock pursuant to team member stock plans 


 


1,040 


 


17,206 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


17,206 


 




Retirement of
  treasury stock


 


—


 


(199,961


)


199,961


 


—


 


—


 


—


 




Excess tax
  benefit related to exercise of team member stock options 


 


— 


 


6,083 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


6,083 


 




Share-based
  payments expense


 


—


 


10,505


 


—


 


—


 


—


 


10,505


 




Cumulative
  effect of new accounting standard adoption (Note 10) 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


— 


 


(1,288 


) 


(1,288 


) 




Other


 


6


 


(498


)


—


 


—


 


—


 


(498


)




Balances at
  September 28, 2008


 


140,286


 


$


1,066,180


 


$


—


 


$


422


 


$


439,422


 


$


1,506,024


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of
these consolidated financial statements.
 
48





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(In
thousands)
Fiscal
years ended September 28, 2008, September 30, 2007 and September 24,
2006
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Cash
  flows from operating activities


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Net income


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 


$


203,828


 




Adjustments to
  reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Depreciation and
  amortization


 


249,213


 


186,390


 


156,223


 




Loss on disposal
  of fixed assets


 


12,949


 


5,654


 


6,291


 




Share-based
  payments expense


 


10,505


 


13,175


 


9,432


 




Deferred income
  tax benefit


 


(9,980


)


(27,203


)


(15,521


)




Excess tax
  benefit related to exercise of team member stock options


 


(5,686


)


(12,839


)


(52,008


)




Deferred lease
  liabilities


 


43,906


 


27,681


 


26,607


 




Other


 


11,603


 


8,169


 


1,942


 




Net change in
  current assets and liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Accounts
  receivable


 


(10,188


)


(5,179


)


(17,720


)




Merchandise
  inventories


 


(52,023


)


(51,055


)


(32,200


)




Prepaid expenses
  and other current assets


 


(35,467


)


1,345


 


(7,849


)




Accounts payable


 


(45,950


)


42,064


 


18,509


 




Accrued payroll,
  bonus and other benefits due team members


 


14,253


 


1,845


 


26,033


 




Other current
  liabilities


 


13,860


 


18,002


 


125,605


 




Net change in
  other long-term liabilities


 


14,241


 


8,515


 


3,492


 




Net cash
  provided by operating activities


 


325,760


 


399,304


 


452,664


 




Cash
  flows from investing activities


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Development
  costs of new store locations


 


(357,511


)


(389,349


)


(208,588


)




Other property,
  plant and equipment expenditures


 


(164,522


)


(140,333


)


(131,614


)




Proceeds from
  hurricane insurance


 


1,500


 


—


 


3,308


 




Acquisition of
  intangible assets


 


(1,402


)


(25,160


)


(16,332


)




Purchase of
  available-for-sale securities


 


(194,316


)


(277,283


)


(555,095


)




Sale of
  available-for-sale securities


 


194,316


 


475,625


 


362,209


 




Decrease
  (increase) in restricted cash


 


1,693


 


57,755


 


(23,143


)




Payment for
  purchase of acquired entities, net of cash acquired


 


(5,480


)


(596,236


)


—


 




Proceeds from
  divestiture, net


 


163,913


 


—


 


—


 




Other investing
  activities


 


(3,245


)


(701


)


—


 




Net cash used in
  investing activities


 


(365,054


)


(895,682


)


(569,255


)




Cash
  flows from financing activities


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dividends paid


 


(109,072


)


(96,742


)


(358,075


)




Issuance of
  common stock


 


18,019


 


54,383


 


222,030


 




Purchase of
  treasury stock


 


—


 


(99,997


)


(99,964


)




Excess tax
  benefit related to exercise of team member stock options


 


5,686


 


12,839


 


52,008


 




Proceeds from
  long-term borrowings


 


317,000


 


717,000


 


—


 




Payments on
  long-term debt and capital lease obligations


 


(161,153


)


(93,357


)


(5,680


)




Other financing
  activities


 


(652


)


—


 


—


 




Net cash
  provided by (used in) financing activities


 


69,828


 


494,126


 


(189,681


)




Net change in
  cash and cash equivalents


 


30,534


 


(2,252


)


(306,272


)




Cash and cash
  equivalents at beginning of year


 


—


 


2,252


 


308,524


 




Cash and cash
  equivalents at end of year


 


$


30,534


 


$


—


 


$


2,252


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Supplemental
  disclosures of cash flow information:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Interest paid


 


$


36,155


 


$


4,561


 


$


607


 




Federal and
  state income taxes paid


 


$


118,366


 


$


152,626


 


$


70,220


 




Non-cash
  transactions:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Increase in
  proceeds receivable for divestiture


 


$


—


 


$


165,054


 


$


—


 




Conversion of
  convertible debentures into common stock, net of fees


 


$


154


 


$


5,686


 


$


4,922


 



 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of
these consolidated financial statements.
 
49





Table of
Contents
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements
Fiscal
years ended September 28, 2008, September 30, 2007 and September 24,
2006
 
(1) Description
of Business
 
Whole Foods Market, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries
(collectively “Whole Foods Market,” “Company,” or “We”) own and operate the
largest chain of supermarkets emphasizing natural and organic foods. Our
Company mission is to promote vitality and well-being for all individuals by
supplying the highest quality, most wholesome foods available. Through our
growth, we have had a large and positive impact on the natural and organic
foods movement throughout the United States, helping lead the industry to
nationwide acceptance over the last 28 years. We opened our first store in
Texas in 1980 and, as of September 28, 2008 we have expanded our
operations both by opening new stores and acquiring existing stores from third
parties to 275 stores: 264 stores in 38 U.S. states and the District of
Columbia; six stores in Canada; and five stores in the United Kingdom.
 
The following is a summary of annual percentage revenues by product
category:
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Grocery


 


33.2


%


32.0


%


31.5


%




Prepared foods


 


19.3


%


19.8


%


19.6


%




Other
  perishables


 


47.5


%


48.3


%


48.8


%




Total sales


 


100.0


%


100.0


%


100.0


%



 
Figures may not sum due to rounding.
 
(2) Summary
of Significant Accounting Policies
 
Definition
of Fiscal Year
 
We
report our results of operations on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the
last Sunday in September. Fiscal years 2008 and 2006 were 52-week years and
fiscal year 2007 was a 53-week year.
 
Principles
of Consolidation
 
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared
in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. All
significant majority-owned subsidiaries are consolidated on a line-by-line
basis, and all significant intercompany accounts and transactions are
eliminated upon consolidation.
 
Cash
and Cash Equivalents
 
We
consider all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of 90 days or
less to be cash equivalents.
 
Restricted Cash
 
Restricted
cash primarily relates to cash held as collateral to support a portion of our projected
workers’ compensation obligations.
 
Inventories
 
We value our inventories
at the lower of cost or market. Cost was determined using the last-in,
first-out (“LIFO”) method for approximately 94.0% and 81.7% of inventories in
fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively. Under the LIFO method, the cost
assigned to items sold is based on the cost of the most recent items purchased.
As a result, the costs of the first items purchased remain in inventory and are
used to value ending inventory. The excess of estimated current costs over LIFO
carrying value, or LIFO reserve, was approximately $32.7 million and $20.0
million at September 28, 2008 and September 30, 2007,
respectively.  Costs for remaining
inventories are determined by the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method.
 
Cost was determined using
the retail method and the item cost method for inventories in fiscal years 2008
and 2007. Under the retail method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the
resulting gross margins are determined by counting each item in inventory, then
applying a cost-to-retail ratio for various groupings of similar items to the
retail value of inventories. Inherent in the retail inventory method
calculations are certain management judgments and estimates which could impact
the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as the resulting gross margins.
The item cost method involves counting each item in inventory, assigning costs
to each of these items based on the actual purchase costs (net of vendor
allowances) of each item and recording the actual cost of items sold. The item
cost method of accounting enables management to more precisely manage inventory
and purchasing levels when compared to the retail method of accounting.
 
Our largest
supplier, United Natural Foods, Inc., accounted for approximately 32%,
24%, and 22% of our total purchases in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively.
 
50





Table of
Contents
 
Property and Equipment
 
Property
and equipment is stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and
amortization. We provide depreciation of equipment over the estimated useful
lives (generally three to 15 years) using the straight-line method. We provide
amortization of leasehold improvements and real estate assets under capital
lease on the straight-line method over the shorter of the estimated useful
lives of the improvements or the terms of the related leases. Terms of leases
used in the determination of estimated useful lives may include renewal periods
at the Company’s option if exercise of the option is determined to be
reasonably assured at the inception of the lease. We provide depreciation of
buildings over the estimated useful lives (generally 20 to 30 years) using the
straight-line method. Costs related to a projected site determined to be
unsatisfactory and general site selection costs that cannot be identified with
a specific store location are charged to operations currently. The Company
recognizes a liability for the fair value of a conditional asset retirement
obligation when the obligation is incurred. Repair and maintenance costs are
expensed as incurred. Interest costs on significant projects constructed or
developed for the Company’s own use are capitalized as a separate component of
the asset. Upon retirement or disposal of assets, the cost and related
accumulated depreciation are removed from the balance sheet and any gain or
loss is reflected in earnings.
 
Operating Leases
 
The Company leases
stores, non-retail facilities and administrative offices under operating
leases. Store lease agreements generally include rent holidays, rent escalation
clauses and contingent rent provisions for percentage of sales in excess of
specified levels. Most of our lease agreements include renewal periods at the
Company’s option. We recognize rent holiday periods and scheduled rent
increases on a straight-line basis over the lease term beginning with the date
the Company takes possession of the leased space for construction and other
purposes. We record tenant improvement allowances and rent holidays as deferred
rent liabilities and amortize the deferred rent over the terms of the lease to
rent. We record rent liabilities for contingent percentage of sales lease
provisions when we determine that it is probable that the specified levels will
be reached during the fiscal year.
 
Goodwill
 
Goodwill
consists of the excess of cost of acquired enterprises over the sum of the
amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired less liabilities assumed.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently if impairment
indicators arise, on a reporting unit level. We allocate goodwill to one
reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. We determine fair value
utilizing both a market value method and discounted projected future cash flows
compared to our carrying value for the purpose of identifying impairment. Our
annual impairment review requires extensive use of accounting judgment and
financial estimates. Application of alternative assumptions and definitions,
such as reviewing goodwill for impairment at a different organizational level,
could produce significantly different results.
 
Intangible Assets
 
Intangible
assets include acquired leasehold rights, favorable lease assets, trade names,
brand names, liquor licenses, license agreements, non-competition agreements
and debt issuance costs. Intangible assets are reviewed for impairment
quarterly, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying
amount of an intangible asset may not be recoverable. We amortize
definite-lived intangible assets on a straight-line basis over the life of the
related agreement, currently one to 46 years for contract-based intangible
assets and one to five years for marketing-related and other identifiable
intangible assets.
 
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Long-Lived
Assets to be Disposed of
 
We
evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be
recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a
comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted cash flows
expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be
impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which
the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets
to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair
value less costs to sell. When the Company commits to relocate a location, a
charge to write down the related assets to their estimated net recoverable
value is included in the “Relocation, store closure and lease termination costs”
line item in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
 
Fair
Value of Financial Instruments
 
The
carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, trade and other accounts
receivable, trade accounts payable, accrued payroll, bonuses and team member
benefits, and other accrued expenses approximate fair value because of the
short maturity of those instruments. Store closure reserves and estimated
worker’s compensation claims are recorded at net present value to approximate
fair value.
 
The
carrying amounts of our five-year term loan and outstanding amounts on our
revolving line of credit approximate fair value because they have variable
interest rates which reflect market changes to interest rates. The fair value
of convertible
 
51





Table
of Contents
 
subordinated
debentures is estimated using quoted market prices. At September 28, 2008
and September 30, 2007, the difference between the carrying value and the
estimated fair value of our convertible debentures is not material.
 
Derivative Instruments
 
The Company utilizes
derivative financial instruments to hedge its exposure to changes in interest
rates. All derivative financial instruments are recorded on the balance sheet
at their respective fair value. The Company does not use financial instruments
or derivatives for any trading or other speculative purposes.
 
During fiscal year 2008,
the Company entered into a three-year interest rate swap agreement with a
notional amount of $490 million to effectively fix the interest rate on $490
million of the term loan at 4.718%, excluding the applicable margin and
associated fees, The interest rate swap was designated as a cash flow
hedge.  The hedge effectiveness is measured by comparing the change in
fair value of the hedge item with the change in fair value of the swap. The
effective portion of the gain or loss of the hedge is recorded on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets under the caption “Accumulated other comprehensive
income.” Any ineffective portion of the hedge, as well as amounts not included
in the assessment of effectiveness, is recorded on the accompanying
Consolidated Statements of Operations under the caption “Interest expense.”
 Hedge ineffectiveness was not material for fiscal year 2008.
 
Insurance and Self-Insurance
Reserves
 
The
Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for
the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability,
property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle
liability and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the
risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering
historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial
assumptions.
 
Reserves for Closed Properties
 
The Company maintains reserves for estimated losses on
retail stores and other properties that are no longer being utilized in current
operations. The Company provides for closed property operating lease
liabilities using a discount rate to calculate the present value of the
remaining noncancelable lease payments after the closing date, net of estimated
subtenant income. The closed property lease liabilities usually are paid over
the remaining lease terms, which generally range from one to 16 years. The
Company estimates subtenant income and future cash flows based on the Company’s
experience and knowledge of the area in which the closed property is located,
the Company’s previous efforts to dispose of similar assets and existing
economic conditions.
 
The reserves for closed properties include management’s
estimates for lease subsidies, lease terminations and future payments on exited
real estate. At September 28, 2008 and September 30, 2007 these
reserves totaled approximately $69.3 million and $97.0 million, respectively.
 
Capital lease properties that are closed are reduced
to their estimated fair value. Reduction in the carrying values of property,
equipment and leasehold improvements are recognized when expected net future
cash flows are less than the assets’ carrying value. The Company estimates net
future cash flows based on its experience and knowledge of the area in which
the closed property is located and, when necessary, utilizes local real estate
brokers.
 
Adjustments to closed property reserves primarily
relate to changes in existing economic conditions, subtenant income or actual
exit costs differing from original estimates. Adjustments are made for changes
in estimates in the period in which the changes become known.
 
Revenue Recognition
 
We recognize
revenue for sales of our products at the point of sale. Discounts provided to
customers at the point of sale are recognized as a reduction in sales as the
products are sold. Sales taxes are not included in revenue.
 
Cost
of Goods Sold and Occupancy Costs
 
Cost of goods sold includes cost of
inventory sold during the period, net of discounts and allowances, contribution
from non-retail distribution and food preparation operations, shipping and
handling costs and occupancy costs. The Company receives various rebates from
third party vendors in the form of quantity discounts and payments under
cooperative advertising agreements. Quantity discounts and cooperative
advertising discounts in excess of identifiable advertising costs are
recognized as a reduction of cost of goods sold when the related merchandise is
sold.
 
Vendor Rebates and Allowances
 
The
Company receives various rebates from third party vendors in the form of
purchase or sales volume discounts and payments under cooperative advertising
agreements. Purchase volume discounts are generally recorded as a reduction of
 
52





Table
of Contents
 
merchandise
costs upon completion of contractual milestones. Sales quantity discounts and
cooperative advertising discounts in excess of identifiable advertising costs
are recognized as a reduction of cost of goods sold when the related merchandise
is sold.
 
Direct
Store Expenses
 
Direct
store expenses consist of store-level expenses such as salaries and benefits,
supplies, depreciation, community marketing and other store-specific costs.
 
General
and Administrative Expenses
 
General
and administrative expenses consist of salaries and benefits costs, occupancy
and other related costs associated with corporate and regional administrative
support services.
 
Advertising
 
Advertising and marketing expense for
fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006 was approximately $39.7 million, $33.0
million, and $24.0 million, respectively. The fiscal year 2006 amount is net of
vendor allowances received for cooperative advertising of approximately $1.2
million in fiscal years 2006. Advertising costs are charged to expense as
incurred and are included in the “Direct store expenses” line item in the
Consolidated Statements of Operations.
 
Pre-opening
Expenses
 
Pre-opening
expenses include rent expense incurred during construction of new stores and
costs related to new store openings including costs associated with hiring and
training personnel, smallwares, supplies and other miscellaneous costs. Rent
expense is generally incurred approximately nine months prior to a store’s
opening date. Other pre-opening expenses are incurred primarily in the 30 days
prior to a new store opening. Pre-opening costs are expensed as incurred.
 
Relocation,
Store Closure and Lease Termination Costs
 
Relocation
costs consist of moving costs, estimated remaining net lease payments,
accelerated depreciation costs, related asset impairment, and other costs
associated with replaced facilities. Store closure costs consist of estimated
remaining lease payments, accelerated depreciation costs, related asset
impairment, and other costs associated with closed facilities. Lease
termination costs consist of estimated remaining net lease payments for
terminated leases and idle properties, and associated asset impairments.
 
Share-Based Payments
 
The Company maintains
several share-based incentive plans. We historically granted options to
purchase common stock under our 1992 Stock Option Plans, as amended.  At our annual shareholders’ meeting on March 5,
2007, our shareholders approved a new plan, the Whole Foods Market 2007 Stock
Incentive Plan. Options are granted pursuant to this new plan. Under both
plans, options are granted at an option price equal to the market value of the
stock at the grant date and are generally exercisable ratably over a four-year
period beginning one year from grant date and have a five-year term. The grant
date is established once the Company’s Board of Directors approves the grant
and all key terms have been determined. The exercise prices of our stock option
grants are the closing price on the grant date. Stock option grant terms and
conditions are communicated to team members within a relatively short period of
time. Our Company generally approves one primary stock option grant annually,
occurring during a trading window.
 
Our
Company offers a team member stock purchase plan to all full-time team members
with a minimum of 400 hours of service. Participating team members may purchase
our common stock through payroll deductions. At our 2007 annual meeting,
shareholders approved a new Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (“TMSPP”) which became
effective on April 1, 2007. The TMSPP replaces all previous stock purchase
plans and provides for a 5% discount on the shares purchase date market value
which meets the “Safe Harbor” provisions of SFAS No. 123R, “Share-Based
Payment,” as amended, and therefore is non-compensatory. As a result, no future
compensation expense will be recognized for our employee stock purchase plan.
Under the previous plans, participating team members could elect to purchase
unrestricted shares at 100% of market value or restricted shares at 85% of
market value on the purchase date.
 
Effective the beginning
of the first quarter of fiscal year 2006, the Company adopted the provisions of
SFAS No. 123R using the modified prospective transition method. Under this
method, prior periods were not restated. The Company uses the Black-Scholes
multiple option pricing model which requires extensive use of accounting
judgment and financial estimates, including estimates of the expected term team
members will retain their vested stock options before exercising them, the
estimated volatility of the Company’s common stock price over the expected
term, and the number of options that will be forfeited prior to the completion
of their vesting requirements. The related share-based payment expense is
recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. The provisions of
SFAS No. 123R apply to new stock options and stock options outstanding,
but not yet vested, on the effective date.
 
53





Table of Contents
 
SFAS No. 123R
requires the Company to value unvested stock options granted prior to its
adoption of SFAS No. 123 under the fair value method and expense these
amounts in the income statement over the stock option’s remaining vesting
period.  The Company intends to keep its
broad-based stock option program in place, but also intends to limit the number
of shares granted in any one year so that annual earnings per share dilution
from share-based payment expense will not exceed 10%. SFAS No. 123R
requires the Company to reflect the tax savings resulting from tax deductions
in excess of expense reflected in its financial statements as a financing cash
flow.
 
Income Taxes
 
We
recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities by applying statutory tax
rates in effect at the balance sheet date to differences between the book basis
and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and
liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable
income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to
reverse. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted to reflect changes in
tax laws or rates in the period that includes the enactment date. Significant
accounting judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes
and related accruals, deferred tax assets and liabilities. The Company believes
that its tax positions are consistent with applicable tax, but certain
positions may be challenged by taxing authorities. In the ordinary course of
business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax
outcome is uncertain. In addition, we are subject to periodic audits and
examinations by the IRS and other state and local taxing authorities. Although
we believe that our estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from
these estimates.
 
On
October 1, 2007, the Company adopted FASB Interpretation No. 48, as
amended, “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an interpretation of FASB
Statement No. 109” (“FIN 48”). FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for
uncertainty in tax positions recognized in the financial statements in
accordance with SFAS No, 109, “Accounting for Income Taxes.”  Under FIN 48, the Company may recognize the
tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not
that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing
authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized
in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on
the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized
upon ultimate settlement.  FIN 48 also
provides guidance on measurement, classification, interest and penalties
associated with tax positions, and income tax disclosures. See Note 10 to the
consolidated financial statements, “Income Taxes,” for further discussion on
the impact of adopting FIN 48.
 
Earnings per Share
 
Basic
earnings per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding during the fiscal period. Diluted earnings per share is based on
the weighted average number of common shares outstanding plus, where
applicable, the additional common shares that would have been outstanding as a
result of the conversion of dilutive options and convertible debt.
 
Comprehensive Income
 
Comprehensive
income consists of net income, unrealized gains and losses on marketable
securities, unrealized gains and losses on cash flow hedge instruments, and
foreign currency translation adjustments, net of income taxes. Comprehensive
income is reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and
Comprehensive Income. At September 28, 2008, accumulated other
comprehensive income consisted of foreign currency translation adjustment gains
of approximately $8.0 million and unrealized losses on cash flow hedge
instruments of approximately $7.6 million. At September 30, 2007,
accumulated other comprehensive income consisted of foreign currency
translation adjustment gains of approximately $15.7 million.
 
Foreign Currency Translation
 
The
Company’s Canadian and United Kingdom operations use their local currency as
their functional currency. Assets and liabilities are translated at exchange
rates in effect at the balance sheet date. Income and expense accounts are
translated at the average monthly exchange rates during the year. Resulting
translation adjustments are recorded as a separate component of accumulated
other comprehensive income.
 
Segment Information
 
In accordance with
SFAS No. 131, “Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related
Information,” the Company has one operating segment and a single reportable
segment, supermarkets emphasizing natural and organic foods. We currently have
six stores in Canada and five stores in the United Kingdom. All of our
remaining operations are domestic.
 
Use of Estimates
 
The
preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions
that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of
contingent assets
 
54





Table
of Contents
 
and
liabilities at the date of the financial statements and revenues and expenses
during the period reported. Actual amounts could differ from those estimates.
 
Reclassifications
 
Where
appropriate, we have reclassified prior years’ financial statements to conform
to current year presentation.
 
Recent
Accounting Pronouncements
 
In September 2006,
the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, “Fair Value Measurements,” as amended. SFAS No. 157
defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and
requires additional disclosures about fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157
applies to fair value measurements that are already required or permitted by
other accounting standards, except for measurements of share-based payments and
measurements that are similar to, but not intended to be, fair value and does
not change existing guidance as to whether or not an instrument is carried at
fair value. SFAS No. 157 is amended by FSP No. FAS 157-1, “Application
of FASB Statement No. 157 to FASB Statement No. 13 and Other
Accounting Pronouncements That Address Fair Value Measurements for Purposes of
Lease Classification or Measurement under Statement 13,” which excludes from
the scope of this provision arrangements accounted for under SFAS No. 13, “Accounting
for Leases.” The statement is further amended by FSP No. FAS 157-3, “Determining
the Fair Value of a Financial Asset When the Market for That Asset Is Not
Active,” which clarifies the application of SFAS No. 157 in a market that
is not active and provides an example to illustrate key considerations in
determining the fair value of a financial asset when the market for that
financial asset is not active. The provisions of SFAS No. 157 are
effective for the specified fair value measures of financial assets and
liabilities for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15,
2007 and interim periods within those fiscal years for items within scope. SFAS
No. 157 is effective for the Company’s first quarter of fiscal year ending
September 27, 2009. The company does not expect that the adoption of SFAS No. 157
will have an impact on our consolidated financial statements.  The provisions of FSP No. FAS 157-2, “Effective
Date of FASB Statement No. 157,” are effective for the specified fair
value measures of nonfinancial assets and liabilities for financial statements
issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2008 and interim
periods within those fiscal years for items within scope. FSP No. FAS
157-2 is effective for the Company’s first quarter of fiscal year ending September 26,
2010. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of SFAS
No. 157 will have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In February 2007,
the FASB issued SFAS No. 159, “The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets
and Financial Liabilities, including an amendment of FASB Statement No. 115.”
SFAS No. 159 permits entities to choose to measure many financial
instruments and certain other items at fair value. SFAS No. 159
applies to all entities that elect the fair value option. However, the
amendment to SFAS No. 115 “Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and
Equity Securities” applies to all entities with available-for-sale and trading
securities. The provisions of SFAS No. 159 are effective for fiscal
years beginning after November 15, 2007. SFAS No. 159 is effective
for the Company’s fiscal year ending September 27, 2009. We are currently
evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of SFAS No. 159 will have
on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In December 2007,
the FASB issued SFAS No. 141R, “Business Combinations,” which replaces
SFAS No. 141, “Business Combinations,” and applies to all transactions or
other events in which an entity obtains control of one or more businesses,
including those sometimes referred to as “true mergers” or “mergers of equals”
and combinations achieved without the transfer of consideration. SFAS No. 141R
establishes principles and requirements for how the acquirer recognizes and
measures identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed, any noncontrolling
interest and goodwill acquired. The Statement also provides for disclosures to
enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and financial
effects of the business combination. The provisions of SFAS No. 141R are
effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008 and are
applied prospectively to business combinations completed on or after that date.
SFAS No. 141R is effective for the Company’s fiscal year ending September 26,
2010. We will evaluate the impact, if any, that the adoption of SFAS No. 141R
could have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In December 2007,
the FASB issued SFAS No. 160, “Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated
Financial Statements — an amendment of ARB No. 51.” SFAS No. 160
establishes accounting and reporting standards for noncontrolling interests (“minority
interests”) in subsidiaries. Additionally, SFAS No. 160 amends certain
consolidation procedures contained in Accounting Reporting Bulletin No. 51
“Consolidated Financial Statements” to make them consistent with the
requirements of SFAS No. 141 “Business Combinations,” as revised. SFAS No. 160
clarifies that a noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary should be accounted
for as a component of equity separate from the parent’s equity. The provisions
of SFAS No. 160 are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within
those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2008 and are applied
prospectively, except for presentation and disclosure requirements, which will
apply retrospectively. SFAS No. 160 is effective for the Company’s first
quarter of fiscal year ending September 26, 2010. We are currently
evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of SFAS No. 160 will have
on our consolidated financial statements.
 
55





Table
of Contents
 
In March 2008, the
FASB issued SFAS No. 161, “Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and
Hedging Activities – an amendment of FASB Statement No. 133.”  SFAS No. 161 amends and expands the
disclosure requirements of SFAS No. 133 “Accounting for Derivative
Instruments and Hedging Activities” by establishing, among other things, the
disclosure requirements for derivative instruments and hedging activities. This
Statement requires qualitative disclosures about objectives and strategies for
using derivatives, quantitative disclosures about fair value amounts of gains
and losses on derivative instruments, and disclosures about credit-risk-related
contingent features in derivative agreements. 
The provisions of SFAS No. 161 are effective for fiscal years and
interim periods beginning after November 15, 2008, with early application
encouraged.  In September 2008, the
FASB issued FSP No. FAS 133-1 and FIN 45-4, “Disclosures about Credit
Derivatives and Certain Guarantees: An Amendment of FASB Statement No. 133
and FASB Interpretation No. 45; and Clarification of the Effective Date of
FASB Statement No. 161,” which clarifies that the effective date applies
to any reporting period beginning after November 15, 2008. SFAS No. 161
is effective for the Company’s second quarter of fiscal year ending September 27,
2009. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of SFAS
No. 161 will have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In April 2008, the
FASB issued FSP No. FAS 142-3, “Determination of the Useful Life of
Intangible Assets.”  FSP No. FAS
142-3 amends the factors that should be considered in developing renewal or
extension assumptions used to determine the useful life of a recognized
intangible asset under SFAS No. 142, “Goodwill and Other Intangible
Assets.”  The intent of the position is
to improve the consistency between the useful life of a recognized intangible
asset under SFAS No. 142 and the period of expected cash flows used to
measure the fair value of the asset under SFAS No. 141R, and other U.S.
generally accepted accounting principles. The provisions of FSP No. FAS
142-3 are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15,
2008.  FSP No. FAS 142-3 is
effective for the Company’s fiscal year ending September 26, 2010. We will
evaluate the impact, if any, that the adoption of FSP No. FAS 142-3 could
have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
In May 2008, the FASB issued FSP No. APB 14-1,
“Accounting for Convertible Debt Instruments That May Be Settled in Cash
upon Conversion (Including Partial Cash Settlement).” FSP No. APB 14-1
clarifies that convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash upon
conversion (including partial cash settlement) are not addressed by paragraph
12 of APB Opinion No. 14, “Accounting for Convertible Debt and Debt Issued
with Stock Purchase Warrants” and specifies that such users should separately
account for the liability and equity components in a manner that will reflect
the entity’s nonconvertible debt borrowing rate when interest cost is
recognized in subsequent periods. The provisions of FSP No. APB 14-1 are
effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008, and interim
periods within those fiscal years. FSP No. APB 14-1 is effective for the
Company’s first quarter of fiscal year ending September 26, 2010. We are
currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of FSP No. APB
14-1 will have on our consolidated financial statements.
 
(3) Business Combination
 
Effective August 28, 2007, the Company completed the acquisition of Wild
Oats Markets, Inc. (“Wild Oats”), in a cash tender offer of $18.50 per
share, or approximately $565 million plus the assumption of approximately $148
million in existing debt. At the date of acquisition, Wild Oats had 109 stores
in 23 states and British Columbia, Canada operating under four banners: Wild
Oats Marketplace nationwide, Henry’s Farmers Market (“Henry’s”) in Southern
California, Sun Harvest in Texas and Capers Community Market in British
Columbia. To fund the transaction, we entered into a five-year $700 million
senior term loan agreement. We also signed a new five-year $250 million
revolving credit agreement that was increased to $350 million during the third
quarter of fiscal year 2008, which replaced our existing $200 million revolver.
Wild Oats results of operations are included in our consolidated financial
statements for the period beginning August 28, 2007 through September 28,
2008. In connection with the acquisition of Wild Oats, the Company separately
entered into an agreement to sell certain assets and liabilities, consisting
primarily of fixed assets, inventories and operating leases, related to all 35
Henry’s and Sun Harvest stores and a related distribution center in Riverside,
CA to a wholly owned subsidiary of Smart & Final, Inc., a Los
Angeles-based food retailer for approximately $165 million. This sale was
completed effective September 30, 2007. During fiscal year 2008, the Company
finalized the sale price, which effectively reduced total proceeds by
approximately $1.1 million. Regarding the other 74 Wild Oats and Capers banner
stores the Company acquired in the Wild Oats Markets transaction, the Company
has closed 19 stores, and currently intends to close one additional store and
relocate an additional three stores as existing Whole Foods Market sites in
development open through fiscal year 2010.
 
The Company believes the synergies gained
from this business combination will create long term value for our customers,
vendors and shareholders as well as exciting opportunities for our new and
existing team members by making us better positioned to compete in this rapidly
changing food retailing environment. Each of our 11 regions gained stores in
the acquisition, with three of our smallest regions, the Florida, Rocky
Mountain, and Pacific Northwest regions, gaining critical mass. The acquisition
provided us with immediate entry into five new states: Arkansas, Indiana,
Oklahoma, Tennessee and Utah, and 14 new areas: Bend, OR; Cincinnati, OH;
 
56





Table
of Contents
 
Indianapolis, IN; Lexington, KY; Little
Rock, AR; Memphis, TN; Naples, FL; Nashville, TN; Reno, NV; Salt Lake City, UT;
Tampa, FL; Tucson, AZ; Tulsa, OK; and Westport, CT.
 
On July 29, 2008,
the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
reversed the August 16, 2007 decision of the United States District Court
for the District of Columbia which had denied the Federal Trade Commission’s (“FTC”)
motion for a preliminary injunction against the acquisition of Wild Oats
Markets by Whole Foods Market, and remanded the case to the District Court for
further proceedings consistent with the appellate decision. On the same day,
the Court of Appeals issued an Order directing the Clerk of the Court of
Appeals to withhold issuance of the mandate in the case until seven days after
disposition of any timely petition for rehearing or petition for rehearing en
banc. On August 26, 2008, Whole Foods Market filed a petition for a
rehearing en banc with the Court of Appeals, to which the Court of Appeals
ordered the FTC to respond.  The FTC opposed the petition.  Subsequent
to year end, on October 6, 2008, Whole Foods Market filed a motion for
leave to file a reply to the FTC’s opposition to the petition
for rehearing en banc, which motion the FTC also opposed.  
On November 21, 2008 the Court of Appeals denied Whole Foods Market’s
petition for a rehearing en banc, amended its earlier opinion and remanded the
case to the District Court for further proceedings.  On remand the FTC may
renew its motion for some preliminary injunctive relief pending resolution of
the administrative action.
 
On August 8, 2008,
the FTC issued an Order rescinding the stay of its administrative proceeding
against Whole Foods Market.  The FTC had previously filed a complaint
commencing its administrative proceeding on June 28, 2007 but had stayed
the proceeding on its own motion pending resolution of the federal court
proceedings related to the merger. On September 8, 2008, the FTC issued an
Amended Compliant in its administrative proceedings changing the relevant
geographic markets and changing the notice of contemplated
relief indicating that, should the FTC prevail in its
administrative proceeding, it would seek relief against Whole Foods
Market, which could include (i) an order preventing Whole Foods from
consolidating any Wild Oats stores into the Whole Foods system to the extent
such consolidation has not occurred at the time of the Commission’s decision; (ii) an
order preventing Whole Foods from selling or disposing of any owned or leased
property that had been used as a Wild Oats store in any geographic market, or a
Whole Foods store in any relevant geographic market; (iii) an order
preventing Whole Foods from discontinuing the use of the Wild Oats name at any
store being operated as Wild Oats at the time of the Commission’s decision; (iv) re-establishment
of Wild Oats stores, with Whole Foods stores added as necessary, along with any
associated or necessary assets in a manner that creates a group or system of
stores that may be available for divestiture, including, but not limited to,
re-opening closed Wild Oats stores, re-naming Wild Oats stores that had been
changed to the Whole Foods name, reversing any consolidation of Wild Oats
stores into the Whole Foods system and re-establishing the Wild Oats system,
and re-establishing Wild Oats’ distribution arrangements, private label
products and supplier relationships; (v) the divestiture of Wild Oats
stores, and Whole Foods stores, and any other associated or necessary assets,
including the Wild Oats name, distribution systems or assets, and supplier
relationships, in a manner that restores Wild Oats as a viable, independent
competitor in the relevant markets, with the ability to offer such services as
Wild Oats had offered prior to its acquisition by Whole Foods; (vi) maintenance
of the Wild Oats stores pending divestiture, including operating the stores in
the ordinary course and maintaining the inventory of the stores, the hours of
operation of the stores and of each department in the stores; (vii) appointment
of a monitor, or a divestiture trustee, to assure that the Wild Oats, Whole
Foods, and related assets are re-established and divested within the time set
forth in the Commission’s decision; (viii) a requirement that, for a
period of time, Whole Foods provide prior notice to the Commission of
acquisitions, mergers, consolidations, or any other combinations of its
operations with any other company providing the operation of premium and
natural organic supermarkets; (ix) a requirement for Whole Foods to file
periodic compliance reports with the Commission; and (x) any other relief
appropriate to correct or remedy the anticompetitive effects of the transaction
or to restore Wild Oats as a viable, independent competitor in the relevant
markets.
 
On September 10,
2008, the FTC issued the Scheduling Order for this matter. The trial is
scheduled to commence on February 16, 2009 and will take no more than
thirty full trial days. Subsequent to year end, on October 20, 2008, the
FTC designated Acting Chief Administrative Law Judge D. Michael Chappell as the
Administrative Law Judge for this matter.
 
Subsequent to year end,
on October 27, 2008, Whole Foods Market was served with the complaint
in Kottaras v. Whole Foods Market, Inc., a putative class action filed in
the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, seeking treble
damages, equitable, injunctive, and declaratory relief and alleging that the
acquisition and merger between Whole Foods Market and Wild Oats violates
various provisions of the federal antitrust laws.
 
Whole Foods Market cannot
at this time predict the likely outcome of these judicial and administrative
proceedings or assess the financial implications of any judgment or order that
may arise from them.
 
During fiscal year 2008, the Company incurred
approximately $2.5 million in legal costs related to the FTC lawsuit which are
included on the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations under the
caption “General and administrative expenses.”
 
57





Table
of Contents
 
Direct Costs of the Acquisition
 
Direct costs of the acquisition include investment
banking fees, legal and accounting fees and other external costs directly
related to the acquisition.
 
Purchase Price Allocation
 
The purchase price of the acquired operations was
comprised of (in thousands):
 



Cash payment to
  Wild Oats shareholders


 


$


564,726


 




Direct costs of
  the acquisition


 


36,992


 




Total purchase
  price


 


$


601,718


 



 
The acquisition was
accounted for under the purchase method of accounting with Whole Foods Market
treated as the acquiring entity in accordance with SFAS No. 141, “Business
Combinations.” Accordingly, the consideration paid by Whole Foods Market to
complete the acquisition has been allocated to the assets and liabilities
acquired based upon their estimated fair values as of the date of the
acquisition. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of
assets acquired and liabilities assumed was recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is
non-amortizing for financial statement purposes and is not tax deductible.
 
The following summarizes the fair values of the assets
acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, including purchase
price adjustments since the initial purchase price allocation (in thousands):
 



 


 


Initial


 


 


 


Final


 




 


 


Purchase


 


Purchase


 


Purchase


 




 


 


Price


 


Price


 


Price


 




 


 


Allocation


 


Adjustments


 


Allocation


 




Current assets


 


$


52,094


 


$


(55


)


$


52,039


 




Property and
  equipment


 


77,107


 


(12,636


)


64,471


 




Goodwill


 


558,056


 


(11,990


)


546,066


 




Intangible
  assets


 


40,607


 


(7,254


)


33,353


 




Deferred income
  taxes


 


67,793


 


4,093


 


71,886


 




Other assets


 


339


 


—


 


339


 




Assets held for
  sale


 


172,256


 


(1,141


)


171,115


 




Total assets
  acquired


 


968,252


 


(28,983


)


939,269


 




Current
  liabilities


 


145,666


 


(2,667


)


142,999


 




Long-term debt


 


134,126


 


—


 


134,126


 




Other
  liabilities


 


82,321


 


(29,097


)


53,224


 




Liabilities held
  for sale


 


7,202


 


—


 


7,202


 




Total
  liabilities assumed


 


369,315


 


(31,764


)


337,551


 




Net assets
  acquired


 


$


598,937


 


$


2,781


 


$


601,718


 



 
The purchase price
adjustments relate primarily to the completion of evaluations of the physical
and market condition of acquired locations as of August 28, 2007 resulting
in the Company’s decision to close seven additional Wild Oats store locations,
and adjustments to the fair values of certain assets and store closure
reserves. The store closure reserves related to Wild Oats locations were
reduced by approximately $28.8 million as discussed in Note 6 to the
consolidated financial statements, “Reserves for Closed Properties.” Additional
adjustments to the purchase price allocation, totaling approximately $4.0
million, include changes in certain tax assets and liabilities primarily
related to amounts finalized in connection with tax filings.
 
58





Table
of Contents
 
Estimated fair values of intangible assets acquired
are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


 


 


Weighted Average


 




 


 


Estimated


 


Useful Lives


 




 


 


Fair Value


 


(Years)


 




Non-amortizing:


 


 


 


 


 




Liquor licenses


 


$


1,165


 


 


 




Amortizing:


 


 


 


 


 




Trade and brand
  names


 


6,579


 


1


 




Favorable
  operating leases


 


25,609


 


18


 




Total amortizing


 


32,188


 


14


 




Total


 


$


33,353


 


 


 



 
Amortizing intangible assets are amortized on a
straight-line basis over their remaining expected useful lives of approximately
one to 33 years.
 
In connection with the acquisition, the Company
recognized liabilities totaling approximately $8.4 million for estimated costs
associated with plans to involuntarily terminate certain team members of Wild
Oats, contract termination fees and other legal reserves totaling approximately
$11.4 million, and estimated costs to close certain store locations totaling
approximately $63.9 million. There have been no adjustments to date to the team
member termination liabilities. Estimated contract termination fees and other
legal reserves increased approximately $2.1 million during fiscal year 2008. As
of September 28, 2008, team member termination liabilities and contract
termination fee and other legal reserves were approximately $0.1 million and
$7.4 million, respectively, as a result of adjustments and payments made during
the fiscal year. Evaluation of involuntary team member terminations and
contract termination activities are substantially complete. Store closure
reserves are discussed further in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements,
“Reserves for Closed Properties.”
 
The Company assumed debt totaling approximately $148
million in the acquisition consisting primarily of convertible subordinated
debentures and capital lease obligations. The estimated fair value of the debt
assumed by the Company was approximately $134 million. Excluding capital lease
obligations, all debt assumed as part of the Wild Oats acquisition was fully
repaid by the end of the first quarter of fiscal year 2008.  Debt is discussed further in Note 8 to the
consolidated financial statements, “Long-Term Debt.”
 
The estimated values of operating leases with
unfavorable terms compared with current market conditions totaled approximately
$1.2 million. These leases have an estimated weighted average life of
approximately 14 years and are included in other liabilities.
 
Henry’s and Sun Harvest Divestiture
 
In
connection with the acquisition of Wild Oats, the Company separately entered
into an agreement to sell certain assets and liabilities, consisting primarily
of fixed assets, inventories and operating leases, related to all 35 Henry’s
and Sun Harvest stores and a related distribution center in Riverside, CA to a
wholly owned subsidiary of Smart & Final, Inc., a Los
Angeles-based food retailer for approximately $165 million. This sale was
completed effective September 30, 2007. During the first quarter of fiscal
year 2008, the Company received proceeds totaling approximately $165 million.
As of September 30, 2007 the proceeds receivable are included on the
accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets under the caption “Proceeds receivable
for divestiture.” As part of purchase accounting for the Wild Oats acquisition,
the Henry’s and Sun Harvest net assets were adjusted to fair value and
therefore no gain or loss was recognized related to this divestiture. During
fiscal year 2008, the Company finalized the sale price, which effectively
reduced total proceeds by approximately $1.1 million.
 
Transition Services Agreement
 
In connection with the
sale of the Henry’s and Sun Harvest stores, Whole Foods Market entered into a
transition services agreement (“TSA”) with Smart & Final under which
Whole Foods Market provided certain general and administrative services for the
35 stores for up to two years. The TSA provided for payments to the Company
calculated for each service area as a certain percentage of total monthly sales
of the Henry’s and Sun Harvest locations, initially totaling 1.75% of total
monthly sales for all services provided under the agreement. The revenue
associated with the agreement was approximately equal to the incremental cost
of providing the support. During fiscal year 2008, the Company earned
approximately $3.4 million in TSA fees which are included on the accompanying
Consolidated Statements of Operations under the caption “General and
administrative expenses.” At the end of fiscal year 2008, services related to
the support agreement were substantially complete.
 
59





Table
of Contents
 
Unaudited Pro Forma Financial Information
 
The following pro forma financial information for
fiscal years 2007 and 2006, present the combined historical results of the
operations of Whole Foods Market and Wild Oats as if the Wild Oats acquisition
and the sale of the Henry’s and Sun Harvest stores had occurred at the
beginning of fiscal year 2006. Certain adjustments have been made to reflect
changes in depreciation, amortization and income taxes based on the Company’s
preliminary estimates of fair values recognized in the application of purchase
accounting, and interest expense on borrowings to finance the acquisition.
These adjustments are subject to change as the initial estimates are refined
over time.
 
Due to differences in
accounting calendars, the pro forma results of operations for fiscal year ended
2007 combines the 53 weeks ended September 30, 2007 for Whole Foods Market
with the 52-weeks ended September 30, 2007 for Wild Oats. The Wild Oats
pro forma results of operations include approximately 47 weeks of Wild Oats
results and approximately five weeks of actual results beginning August 25,
2007 which are included in Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations. The
pro forma results of operations for fiscal year 2006 combines the 52-weeks of
Whole Foods Market’s fiscal year ended September 24, 2006 with the
52-weeks of Wild Oats’ fiscal year ended December 30, 2006. Pro forma
results of operations were as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2007


 


2006


 




Sales


 


$


7,295,384


 


$


6,417,076


 




Net income


 


142,788


 


168,198


 




Earnings per
  share:


 


 


 


 


 




Basic


 


$


1.02


 


$


1.21


 




Diluted


 


$


1.01


 


$


1.16


 




Weighted average
  shares outstanding:


 


 


 


 


 




Basic


 


140,088


 


139,328


 




Diluted


 


141,836


 


145,082


 



 
This pro forma financial information is not intended
to represent or be indicative of what would have occurred if the transactions
had taken place on the dates presented and are not indicative of what Whole
Foods Market’s actual results of operations would have been had the acquisition
and sale been completed on the dates indicated above. Further, the pro forma
combined results do not reflect one-time costs to fully merge and operate the
combined organization more efficiently, or anticipated synergies expected to result
from the combination and should not be relied upon as being indicative of the
future results that Whole Foods Market will experience.
 
(4) Natural Disaster Costs
 
The
Company has two stores in the New Orleans area which were damaged by and closed
due to Hurricane Katrina during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2005, and
accordingly the Company recorded expenses totaling approximately $16.5 million
for related estimated net losses. In fiscal year 2006, the Company recognized
approximately $7.2 million in pre-tax credits for insurance proceeds and other
adjustments related to previously estimated Hurricane Katrina losses, of which
approximately $4.2 million is included in “Direct store expenses,”
approximately $0.9 million is included in “Cost of goods sold and occupancy
costs,” and approximately $2.1 million is included in “Investment and other
income.”
 
(5) Property and Equipment
 
Balances
of major classes of property and equipment are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 




Land


 


$


51,436


 


$


51,746


 




Buildings and
  leasehold improvements


 


1,463,907


 


1,209,256


 




Capitalized real
  estate leases


 


24,874


 


24,874


 




Fixtures and
  equipment


 


1,157,086


 


1,022,719


 




Construction in
  progress and equipment not yet in service


 


197,026


 


174,755


 




 


 


2,894,329


 


2,483,350


 




Less accumulated
  depreciation and amortization


 


(994,212


)


(816,791


)




 


 


$


1,900,117


 


$


1,666,559


 



 
Depreciation and
amortization expense related to property and equipment totaled approximately
$233.5 million, $181.9 million, and $152.4 million for fiscal years 2008, 2007
and 2006, respectively. Property and equipment included accumulated accelerated
depreciation and other asset impairments totaling approximately $16.5 million
and $10.5 million at September 28, 2008 and September 30, 2007, respectively.
Property and equipment includes approximately $6.0 million, $0.9 million and
 
60





Table
of Contents
 
$0.9 million of interest
capitalized during fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Development
costs of new store locations totaled approximately $357.5 million, $389.3
million, and $208.6 million in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
As of November 5, 2008, we had signed leases for 66 stores under
development.
 
(6) Reserves
for Closed Properties
 
The
Company maintains reserves for retail stores and other properties that are no
longer being utilized in current operations. The Company provides for closed property
operating lease liabilities using a discount rate to calculate the present
value of the remaining noncancelable lease payments and lease termination fees
after the closing date, net of estimated subtenant income. The closed property
lease liabilities are expected to be paid over the remaining lease terms, which
generally range from one to 17 years. The Company estimates subtenant income
and future cash flows based on the Company’s experience and knowledge of the area
in which the closed property is located, the Company’s previous efforts to
dispose of similar assets, existing economic conditions and when necessary
utilizes local real estate brokers.
 
Following is a
summary of store closure reserve activity during the fiscal years ended September 28,
2008 and September 30, 2007 (in thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 




Beginning
  balance


 


$


96,967


 


$


39


 




Additions


 


9,092


 


97,352


 




Usage


 


(22,045


)


(417


)




Adjustments


 


(14,745


)


(7


)




Ending Balance


 


$


69,269


 


$


96,967


 



 
Additions to store closure reserves relate to the
accretion of interest on existing reserves and new closures.  Fiscal year
2007 additions include approximately $92.7 million of store closure reserves
for Wild Oats locations that were recorded in connection with the acquisition.
Adjustments to closed property reserves primarily relate to changes in existing
economic conditions, subtenant income or actual exit costs differing from
original estimates. Adjustments are made for changes in estimates in the period
in which the changes become known. During fiscal year 2008, the Company
recognized charges for adjustments of approximately $14.1 million related to
increases in reserves due to the downturn in the real estate market and the
economy in general, which are included on the accompanying Consolidated
Statements of Operations under the caption “Relocation, store closure and lease
termination costs.”  The Company’s initial estimates of Wild Oats store
closure reserves were reduced by approximately $28.8 million as part of the
final purchase price allocation. These purchase price adjustments relate
primarily to the completion of evaluations of the physical and market condition
of acquired locations as of August 28, 2007, resulting in the Company’s
decision to close seven additional Wild Oats store locations and adjustments to
the fair values of certain assets and store closure reserves.
 
(7) Goodwill and Other
Intangible Assets
 
Goodwill is
reviewed for impairment annually on the first day of the fourth fiscal quarter,
or more frequently if impairment indicators arise. Given the unfavorable
general economic environment the Company is experiencing that appears to be
negatively impacting our sales and overall financial results, goodwill was
evaluated for impairment at our annual testing date and September 28,
2008. We allocate goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill impairment
testing. During fiscal year 2007, we acquired goodwill totaling approximately
$546.0 million in connection with the acquisition of Wild Oats, including
purchase price adjustments during fiscal year 2008. Indefinite-lived intangible
assets are reviewed for impairment quarterly. We acquired indefinite-lived
intangible assets totaling approximately $20,000 and $1.2 million during fiscal
years 2008 and 2007, respectively, consisting primarily of liquor licenses.
There was no impairment of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets
during fiscal years 2008, 2007, or 2006.
 
Definite-lived
intangible assets are amortized over the useful life of the related agreement.
We acquired definite-lived intangible assets totaling approximately $1.7
million and $64.8 million during fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively,
consisting primarily of acquired leasehold rights. Of the definite-lived
intangible assets acquired in fiscal year 2007, approximately $42.8 million
were associated with the acquisition of Wild Oats.  This transaction is discussed further in Note
3 to the consolidated financial statements, “Business Combination.”
Amortization associated with intangible assets totaled approximately $12.9
million, $2.7 million, and $2.5 million during fiscal years 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively.
 
61





Table
of Contents
 
The components of
intangible assets were as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 




 


 


Gross carrying


 


Accumulated


 


Gross carrying


 


Accumulated


 




 


 


amount


 


amortization


 


amount


 


amortization


 




Indefinite-lived
  contract-based


 


$


1,966


 


$


—


 


$


1,943


 


$


—


 




Definite-lived
  contract-based


 


95,424


 


(18,995


)


103,661


 


(14,650


)




Definite-lived
  marketing-related and other


 


8,319


 


(8,215


)


8,519


 


(1,790


)




 


 


$


105,709


 


$


(27,210


)


$


114,123


 


$


(16,440


)



 
Amortization
associated with the net carrying amount of intangible assets is estimated to be
approximately $6.2 million in fiscal year 2009, $6.1 million in fiscal year
2010, $6.0 million in fiscal year 2011, $5.9 million in fiscal year 2012 and
$5.0 million in fiscal year 2013.
 
(8) Long-Term Debt
 
We
have long-term debt and obligations under capital leases as follows (in
thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 




Obligations
  under capital lease agreements, due in monthly installments through 2029


 


$


19,021


 


$


19,384


 




Convertible
  debentures, including accreted interest


 


2,698


 


24,484


 




Revolving line
  of credit


 


195,000


 


17,000


 




Cash flow hedge
  instrument


 


12,451


 


—


 




Senior unsecured
  notes


 


700,000


 


700,000


 




Total long-term
  debt


 


929,170


 


760,868


 




Less current
  installments


 


380


 


24,781


 




Long-term debt,
  less current installments


 


$


928,790


 


$


736,087


 



 
On August 28,
2007, the Company entered into a $700 million, five-year term loan agreement to
finance the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. The loan, which is secured by a
pledge of substantially all of the stock of our subsidiaries, bears interest at
our option of the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin or
LIBOR plus an applicable margin based on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P
rating. The interest period on LIBOR borrowings may range from one to six
months at our option. The term loan agreement contains certain affirmative
covenants including maintenance of certain financial ratios and certain
negative covenants including limitations on additional indebtedness and
payments as defined in the agreement. At September 28, 2008, we were in
compliance with the all applicable debt covenants. The Company recorded
approximately $3.4 million in debt origination fees for the term loan which are
being amortized on a straight-line basis over the life of the loan. During the
first quarter of fiscal year 2008, the Company entered into a three-year
interest rate swap agreement with a notional amount of $490 million to
effectively fix the interest rate on $490 million of the term loan at 4.718%,
excluding the applicable margin and associated fees, to help manage exposure to
interest rate fluctuations. The Company had accumulated net derivative losses
of approximately $7.6 million, net of taxes, in other comprehensive income as
of September 28, 2008, related to this cash flow hedge. Hedge
ineffectiveness was not material during fiscal year 2008.
 
On August 28,
2007, we replaced our previous revolving credit facility with a new $250
million revolving line of credit that extends to 2012. During the third quarter
of fiscal year 2008, the Company exercised the accordion feature available
under the revolving credit facility to increase the aggregate commitment to
$350 million and amend certain debt covenants contained in the agreement. The
credit agreement contains certain affirmative covenants including maintenance
of certain financial ratios and certain negative covenants including
limitations on additional indebtedness and payments as defined in the
agreement. At September 28, 2008, we were in compliance with the all applicable
debt covenants. All outstanding amounts borrowed under this agreement bear
interest at our option of the ABR plus an applicable margin or LIBOR plus an
applicable margin based on the Company’s Moody’s and S&P rating. Commitment
fees on the undrawn amount, reduced by outstanding letters of credit, are
payable under this agreement. At September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007, the Company had $195 million and $17 million, respectively, drawn under
this agreement. The amount available to the Company under the agreement was
effectively reduced to $75.9 million by outstanding letters of credit totaling
approximately $79.1 million and current borrowings at September 28, 2008.
Subsequent to the end of the fiscal year, the Company repaid certain amounts outstanding
under the line and increased letters of credit outstanding. As of November 21,
2008, the Company had $169 million outstanding and approximately $101.9 million
available on its revolving credit facility.
 
62





Table of
Contents
 
A summary of applicable
interest rates as of the end of fiscal years 2008 and 2007 follows:



 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


2008


 


2007


 




Term loan
  agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin on non-swap portion of loan


 


2.469


%


5.179


%




Interest rate
  swap fixed interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


4.718


%


n/a


 




Applicable
  margin – LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.375


%


1.000


%




Applicable margin
  – ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.375


%


n/a


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




Line of credit
  agreement:


 


 


 


 


 




Variable
  interest rate, excluding applicable margin


 


4.221


%


6.750


%




Applicable
  margin – LIBOR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


1.500


%


1.000


%




Applicable
  margin – ABR, based on Moody’s and S&P ratings


 


0.500


%


n/a


 




Commitment fee
  on undrawn amount


 


0.275


%


0.200


%



 
Subsequent to the
end of fiscal year 2008 and due to a downgrade in our corporate credit rating
by Moody’s and S&P, the margin applicable to our term loan increased to
0.75% and 1.75% on ABR borrowings and LIBOR borrowings, respectively.
Additionally, the margin applicable to our revolving credit facility increased
to 0.875% and 1.875% on ABR borrowings and LIBOR borrowings, respectively. These
applicable margins are currently the maximum allowed under these
agreements. These ratings changes also allow participating banks to obtain
security interests in certain of the Company’s equipment, inventories, accounts
receivable, intellectual property and other personal property assets to
collateralize amounts outstanding under the term loan and revolving credit
facility. Pursuant to this right, the participating banks have requested that
the Company execute related security agreements and the Company intends to
comply timely with this request.
 
We have
outstanding convertible subordinated debentures which had a carrying amount of
approximately $2.7 million and $24.5 million at September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007, respectively. The Company assumed convertible debentures totaling
approximately $115.0 million in the Wild Oats acquisition, of which
approximately $94.2 million was paid off during fiscal year 2007 and
approximately $21.8 million, which included a related conversion premium
totaling approximately $0.9 million, was paid off during fiscal year 2008. The
remaining Whole Foods Market debentures have an effective yield to maturity of
5% and a scheduled maturity date of March 2, 2018. The debentures are
convertible at the option of the holder, at any time on or prior to maturity,
unless previously redeemed or otherwise purchased. The debentures may be
redeemed at the option of the holder on March 2, 2013 at the issue price
plus accrued original discount to the date of redemption. Subject to certain
limitations, at our option, we may elect to pay this purchase price in cash,
shares of common stock or any combination thereof. The debentures may also be
redeemed in cash at the option of the holder if there is a change in control at
the issue price plus accrued original discount to the date of redemption. The
Company may redeem the debentures for cash, in whole or in part, at redemption
prices equal to the issue price plus accrued original discount to the date of
redemption. The debentures are subordinated in the right of payment to all
existing and future senior indebtedness. The debentures have a conversion rate
of 21.280 shares of Company common stock per $1,000 principal amount at
maturity, or approximately 91,000 shares and 97,000 shares at September 28,
2008 and September 30, 2007, respectively. Approximately $154,000 and $5.8
million of the carrying amount of the debentures were voluntarily converted by
holders to shares of Company common stock during fiscal years 2008 and 2007,
respectively. The Company sent a notice to holders on November 6, 2008
that the Company intends to redeem remaining debentures on December 8,
2008 at a redemption price equal to the issue price plus accrued original issue
discount totaling approximately $2.7 million.
 
The Company is
committed under certain capital leases for rental of certain equipment,
buildings and land. These leases expire or become subject to renewal clauses at
various dates through 2029. Capital leases totaling approximately $19.1 million
were assumed with the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets.  Lease agreements are discussed further in
Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements, “Leases.”
 
(9) Leases
 
The
Company is committed under certain capital leases for rental of equipment,
buildings, and land and certain operating leases for rental of facilities and
equipment. These leases expire or become subject to renewal clauses at various
dates from 2009 to 2054. Amortization of equipment under capital lease is
included with depreciation expense.
 
Rental
expense charged to operations under operating leases for fiscal years 2008,
2007 and 2006 totaled approximately $257.5 million, $201.0 million and $153.1
million, respectively.
 
63





Table of
Contents
 
Minimum
rental commitments and sublease rental income required by all noncancelable
leases are approximately as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


Capital


 


Operating


 


Sublease


 




2009


 


$


2,089


 


$


261,467


 


$


3,817


 




2010


 


2,088


 


307,356


 


2,997


 




2011


 


2,091


 


320,127


 


2,500


 




2012


 


2,103


 


321,762


 


2,374


 




2013


 


2,076


 


319,666


 


2,255


 




Future fiscal
  years


 


30,678


 


4,487,385


 


12,407


 




 


 


41,125


 


$


6,017,763


 


$


26,350


 




Less amounts
  representing interest


 


22,104


 


 


 


 


 




Net present
  value of capital lease obligations


 


19,021


 


 


 


 


 




Less current
  installments


 


380


 


 


 


 


 




Long-term
  capital lease obligations, less current installments


 


$


18,641


 


 


 


 


 



 
The
present values of future minimum obligations for capital leases shown above are
calculated based on interest rates determined at the inception of the lease, or
upon acquisition of the original lease.
 
During
fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, we paid contingent rentals totaling
approximately $10.8 million, $9.9 million and $9.6 million, respectively.
During fiscal year 2007, we recorded an asset retirement obligation associated
with operating leases totaling approximately $825,000. No asset retirement
obligations associated with operating leases were incurred during fiscal years
2008 and 2006. Sublease rental income totaled approximately $5.4 million, $3.9
million and $1.6 million during fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
John Mackey and Glenda Chamberlain, executive officers of the Company, own
approximately 51% and 2%, respectively, of BookPeople, Inc., a retailer of
books and periodicals that is unaffiliated with the Company, which leases
retail space in Austin, Texas from the Company. The lease provides for an aggregate
annual minimum rent of approximately $0.5 million, $0.4 million, and $0.4
million which the Company received in rental income in fiscal years 2008, 2007
and 2006, respectively.
 
(10) Income Taxes
 
Components
of income tax expense attributable to continuing operations are as follows (in
thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Current federal
  income tax


 


$


62,835


 


$


114,503


 


$


120,774


 




Current state
  income tax


 


22,906


 


34,138


 


30,632


 




Current foreign
  income tax


 


6,758


 


389


 


—


 




Total current
  tax


 


92,499


 


149,030


 


151,406


 




Deferred federal
  income tax


 


(1,086


)


(17,014


)


(13,350


)




Deferred state
  income tax


 


(1,589


)


(5,091


)


(2,171


)




Deferred foreign
  income tax


 


2,171


 


(5,098


)


—


 




Total deferred
  tax


 


(504


)


(27,203


)


(15,521


)




Total income tax
  expense


 


$


91,995


 


$


121,827


 


$


135,885


 



 
Actual
income tax expense differed from the amount computed by applying statutory
corporate income tax rates to income from continuing operations before income
taxes as follows (in thousands):



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Federal tax
  based on statutory rates


 


$


72,282


 


$


106,599


 


$


118,900


 




Increase
  (reduction) in income taxes resulting from:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Change in
  valuation allowance


 


—


 


(626


)


(31


)




Tax exempt
  interest


 


(112


)


(1,010


)


(1,352


)




Share-based compensation


 


(181


)


669


 


(462


)




Deductible state
  income taxes


 


(7,461


)


(10,167


)


(9,962


)




Tax rate
  differential relating to foreign operations


 


(4,953


)


—


 


—


 




Other, net


 


2,174


 


2,024


 


331


 




Total federal
  taxes


 


61,749


 


97,489


 


107,424


 




State income
  taxes


 


21,317


 


29,047


 


28,461


 




Foreign income
  taxes


 


8,929


 


(4,709


)


—


 




Total income tax
  expense


 


$


91,995


 


$


121,827


 


$


135,885


 



 
64





Table of
Contents
 
As
of September 28, 2008 we had a current income taxes receivable totaling
approximately $24.0 million.  Current
income taxes payable as of September 30, 2007 totaled approximately $26.5
million. The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to significant
portions of the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities for continuing
operations are as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 




Deferred tax
  assets:


 


 


 


 


 




Compensation-related
  costs


 


$


61,373


 


$


58,457


 




Insurance-related
  costs


 


29,908


 


27,665


 




Inventories


 


4,143


 


1,978


 




Lease and other
  termination accruals


 


26,932


 


39,861


 




Rent
  differential


 


61,917


 


42,935


 




Tax basis of
  fixed assets in excess of financial basis


 


—


 


4,587


 




Deferred taxes
  associated with unrecognized tax benefit


 


7,779


 


—


 




Cash flow hedge
  instrument


 


4,865


 


—


 




Net domestic and
  international operating loss carryforwards


 


5,223


 


8,305


 




Capital loss
  carryforwards


 


—


 


2,810


 




International
  charitable contribution carryforwards


 


—


 


44


 




Tax credit
  carryforwards


 


124


 


—


 




Gross deferred
  tax assets


 


202,264


 


186,642


 




Valuation
  allowance


 


(5,325


)


(9,474


)




 


 


196,939


 


177,168


 




Deferred tax
  liabilities:


 


 


 


 


 




Financial basis
  of fixed assets in excess of tax basis


 


(5,916


)


—


 




Capitalized
  costs expensed for tax purposes


 


(472


)


(1,384


)




Other


 


(1,120


)


(4,008


)




 


 


(7,508


)


(5,392


)




Net deferred tax
  assets


 


$


189,431


 


$


171,776


 



 
Deferred
taxes for continuing operations have been classified on the consolidated
balance sheets as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 




Current assets


 


$


80,429


 


$


66,899


 




Noncurrent
  assets


 


109,002


 


104,877


 




Net deferred tax
  assets


 


$


189,431


 


$


171,776


 



 
Approximately
$4.0 million of the increase in the net deferred tax asset during fiscal year
2008 related to the recognition of deferred differences as a purchase price
adjustment associated with the acquisition of Wild Oats Markets.
 
At
September 28, 2008, we had international operating loss carryforwards
totaling approximately $18.6 million, all of which has an indefinite life.  During fiscal year 2008, approximately $3.9
million of the valuation allowance related to the utilization of certain
capital loss carryforwards and acquired state operating loss carryforwards was
released as a purchase price adjustment related to the acquisition of Wild Oats
Markets.  In addition, the valuation
allowance decreased by approximately $0.4 million as a result of the change in
the statutory tax rate in the U.K. The valuation allowance also increased by
approximately $0.1 million related to the establishment of a valuation
allowance on certain acquired federal credit carryforwards.  We have provided a valuation allowance of
approximately $5.3 million for deferred tax assets associated with
international operating loss carryforwards and federal credit carryforwards for
which management has determined it is more likely than not that the deferred
tax asset will not be realized. Management believes that it is more likely than
not that we will fully realize the remaining domestic deferred tax assets in
the form of future tax deductions based on the nature of these deductible
temporary differences and a history of profitable operations.
 
During
fiscal year 2008, the Company repatriated approximately $59.8 million from its
Canadian subsidiary, resulting in approximately $6.1 million in income tax
expense. At September 28, 2008, no provision was made for any United
States or additional foreign taxes on remaining undistributed earnings related
to certain foreign operations as those earnings are considered permanently
reinvested.  It is the Company’s current
intention to utilize those earnings in the foreign operations for an indefinite
period of time.
 
65





Table of
Contents
 
On
October 1, 2007, the Company adopted FIN 48, which clarifies the
accounting for uncertainty in income tax positions recognized in the financial
statements in accordance with SFAS No. 109.  The cumulative effect of adopting FIN 48 has
been recorded as a decrease of approximately $1.3 million to the Company’s
fiscal 2008 opening retained earnings. We also recorded an increase of
approximately $7.2 million to deferred income tax assets and an increase
to income taxes payable of approximately $8.4 million.  All unrecognized tax benefits at September 28,
2008 are included as “Other long-term liabilities” on the accompanying
Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 
At
September 28, 2008, the Company had unrecognized tax benefits of $19.9
million, not including accrued interest and penalties.  A reconciliation of the unrecognized tax
benefits is as follows (in thousands):
 



Balance at October 1, 2007


 


$


 16,087


 




Additions based
  on tax positions related to the current year


 


1,738


 




Additions for
  tax positions of prior years


 


3,870


 




Reductions for
  tax positions of prior years


 


(1,126


)




Lapse of statute
  of limitations


 


(549


)




Settlements


 


(108


)




Balance at
  September 28, 2008


 


$


19,912


 



 
If
the Company were to prevail on all unrecognized tax benefits recorded,
approximately $16.4 million of the $19.9 million reserve would
benefit future effective tax rates. In addition, associated penalties and
interest previously recognized would also benefit the future effective tax
rates. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to
unrecognized tax benefits within its global operations as a component of income
tax expense.  During the year ended September 28,
2008, we recognized approximately $3.3 million in interest and penalties.
We had accrued approximately $6.9 million and $3.4 million for the
payment of interest and penalties at September 28, 2008 and September 30,
2007, respectively.
 
The
Company and its domestic subsidiaries file income tax returns with federal,
state and local tax authorities within the United States. The Company’s foreign
affiliates file income tax returns in Canada and the United Kingdom. The IRS is
currently examining the Company’s federal tax returns for its fiscal years 2006
and 2005. With limited exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to federal
income tax examinations for fiscal years prior to 2005 and is no longer subject
to state and local income tax examinations for fiscal years prior to 2001.
 
It is reasonably possible
that the amount of the unrecognized tax benefit with respect to certain of our
unrecognized tax positions will increase or decrease during the next
12 months; however, we do not expect the change to have a significant
effect on our results of operations or our financial position.
 
(11) Shareholders’ Equity
 
Dividends
 
Following is a
summary of dividends declared during fiscal years 2008 and 2007 (in thousands,
except per share amounts):
 



Date of


 


Dividend


 


Date of


 


Date of


 


Total


 




Declaration


 


per
  Share


 


Record


 


Payment


 


Amount


 




Fiscal
  year 2008:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




November 20,
  2007


 


$


0.20


 


January 11, 2008


 


January 22, 2008


 


$


27,901


 




March 10,
  2008


 


0.20


 


April 11, 2008


 


April 22, 2008


 


28,041


 




June 11,
  2008


 


0.20


 


July 11, 2008


 


July 22, 2008


 


28,057


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Fiscal
  year 2007:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




September 27,
  2006


 


$


0.15


 


October 13, 2006


 


October 23, 2006


 


$


20,971


 




November 2,
  2006


 


0.18


 


January 12, 2007


 


January 22, 2007


 


25,303


 




March 5,
  2007


 


0.18


 


April 13, 2007


 


April 24, 2007


 


25,448


 




June 5,
  2007


 


0.18


 


July 13, 2007


 


July 24, 2007


 


25,019


 




September 20,
  2007


 


0.18


 


October 12, 2007


 


October 23, 2007


 


25,071


 



 
During the fourth quarter
of fiscal year 2008, the Company’s Board of Directors suspended the quarterly
cash dividend for the foreseeable future.
 
Treasury Stock
 
On July 31, 2008,
the Company’s Board of Directors approved a $100 million increase in the
Company’s stock repurchase program, bringing the total authorization to $400
million through November 8, 2009 and the current remaining authorization
 
66





Table of
Contents
 
to approximately $200 million.
At September 30, 2007, the Company held in treasury approximately 4.5
million shares of common stock.  The
average price per share paid for shares held in treasury at September 30,
2007 was $43.98, for a total of approximately $200 million. During the first
quarter of fiscal year 2008, the Company retired all shares held in treasury.
The specific timing and repurchase of future amounts will vary based on market
conditions, securities law limitations and other factors and will be made using
the Company’s available resources. The repurchase program may be suspended or
discontinued at any time without prior notice.
 
(12)
Comprehensive Income
 
Our comprehensive
income was comprised of net income, unrealized losses on marketable securities,
unrealized losses on cash flow hedge instruments, and foreign currency
translation adjustments, net of income taxes. Comprehensive income, net of
related tax effects, was as follows (in thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 




Net income


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 




Foreign currency
  translation adjustment, net


 


(7,714


)


8,824


 




Unrealized loss
  on investments, net


 


—


 


(77


)




Unrealized loss
  on cash flow hedge instruments, net


 


(7,586


)


—


 




Comprehensive
  income


 


$


99,224


 


$


191,487


 



 
At September 28,
2008, accumulated other comprehensive income consisted of foreign currency
translation adjustment gains of approximately $8.0 million and unrealized
losses on cash flow hedge instruments of approximately $7.6 million, net of
related income tax effect of approximately $4.9 million.
 
(13) Earnings per Share
 
The
computation of basic earnings per share is based on the number of weighted
average common shares outstanding during the period. The computation of diluted
earnings per share includes the dilutive effect of common stock equivalents consisting
of common shares deemed outstanding from the assumed exercise of stock options
and the assumed conversion of zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures.
 
A
reconciliation of the numerators and denominators of the basic and diluted
earnings per share calculations follows (in thousands, except per share
amounts):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Net income
  (numerator for basic earnings per share)


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,740


 


$


203,828


 




Interest on 5%
  zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures, net of income taxes


 


—


 


98


 


283


 




Adjusted net
  income (numerator for diluted earnings per share)


 


$


114,524


 


$


182,838


 


$


204,111


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Weighted average
  common shares outstanding (denominator for basic earnings per share)


 


139,886


 


140,088


 


139,328


 




Potential common
  shares outstanding:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Assumed
  conversion of 5% zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures


 


—


 


116


 


363


 




Assumed exercise
  of stock options


 


125


 


1,632


 


5,391


 




Weighted average
  common shares outstanding and potential additional common shares outstanding (denominator
  for diluted earnings per share)


 


140,011


 


141,836


 


145,082


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings
  per share


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.30


 


$


1.46


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Diluted earnings
  per share


 


$


0.82


 


$


1.29


 


$


1.41


 



 
The
computation of diluted earnings per share does not include approximately 70,000
shares of common stock related to the zero coupon convertible subordinated
debentures at the end of fiscal year 2008 and options to purchase approximately
13.4 million, 10.6 million and 4.3 million shares of common stock at the end of
fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively, due to their antidilutive
effect.
 
67





Table of
Contents
 
(14) Share-Based Payments
 
Share-based payment
expense before income taxes recognized during fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006
was approximately $10.5 million, $13.2 million and $9.4 million, respectively.
Share-based payment expense was included in the following line items on the
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


$


233


 


$


475


 


$


264


 




Direct store
  expenses


 


5,300


 


7,093


 


3,555


 




General and
  administrative expenses


 


4,972


 


5,607


 


5,613


 




Share-based
  payment expense before income taxes


 


10,505


 


13,175


 


9,432


 




Income tax
  benefit


 


(4,815


)


(4,114


)


(2,724


)




Net share-based
  payment expense


 


$


5,690


 


$


9,061


 


$


6,708


 



 
Stock Option Plan
 
We historically granted
options to purchase common stock under our 1992 Stock Option Plans, as
amended.  At our 2007 annual shareholders’
meeting, our shareholders approved the Whole Foods Market 2007 Stock Incentive
Plan. The fiscal year 2008 and 2007 options were granted pursuant to this new
plan.  Our Company has, in connection
with certain of our business combinations, assumed the stock option plans of
the acquired companies. All options outstanding under our Company’s previous
plans and plans assumed in business combinations continue to be governed by the
terms and conditions of those grants. Under these plans, options are granted at
an option price equal to the market value of the stock at the grant date and
are generally exercisable ratably over a four-year period beginning one year
from grant date. Options granted in fiscal years 2006 through 2008 expire five
years from the date of grant. The market value of the stock is determined as
the closing stock price at the grant date. 
At September 28, 2008, September 30, 2007, and September 24,
2006 approximately 4.5 million, 5.5 million and 6.5 million shares of our
common stock, respectively, were available for future stock option grants. The
following table summarizes option activity (in thousands, except per share
amounts and contractual lives in years):



 


 


 


 


 


 


Weighted


 


 


 




 


 


Number


 


Weighted


 


Average


 


Aggregate


 




 


 


of Options


 


Average


 


Remaining


 


Intrinsic


 




 


 


Outstanding


 


Exercise Price


 


Contractual Life


 


Value


 




Outstanding options
  at September 25, 2005


 


22,545


 


$


44.58


 


 


 


 


 




Options granted


 


1,444


 


69.00


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  exercised


 


(5,466


)


36.00


 


 


 


 


 




Options expired


 


(202


)


56.57


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  forfeited


 


(46


)


64.52


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding
  options at September 24, 2006


 


18,275


 


$


48.82


 


 


 


 


 




Options granted


 


1,704


 


39.77


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  exercised


 


(1,879


)


26.30


 


 


 


 


 




Options expired


 


(704


)


60.64


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  forfeited


 


(185


)


58.70


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding
  options at September 30, 2007


 


17,211


 


$


49.80


 


 


 


 


 




Options granted


 


2,249


 


27.59


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  exercised


 


(973


)


15.73


 


 


 


 


 




Options expired


 


(842


)


55.64


 


 


 


 


 




Options
  forfeited


 


(215


)


43.18


 


 


 


 


 




Outstanding
  options at September 28, 2008


 


17,430


 


$


48.64


 


3.29


 


$


29


 




Vested/expected
  to vest at September 28, 2008


 


17,027


 


$


49.01


 


3.26


 


$


25


 




Exercisable
  options at September 28, 2008


 


13,437


 


$


51.88


 


3.07


 


$


3


 



 
The
weighted average fair values of options granted during fiscal years 2008, 2007
and 2006 were $6.46, $9.76, and $17.04, respectively.  The aggregate intrinsic value of stock
options at exercise, represented in the table above, was approximately $20.9
million during fiscal year 2008 and $45.3 million during fiscal year 2007. As
of the end of fiscal years 2008 and 2007, there was approximately $29.8 million
and $27.5 million of unrecognized share-based payments expense, respectively,
related to nonvested stock options, net of estimated forfeitures, related to
approximately 3.6 million and 2.5 million shares, respectively. We
anticipate this expense to be recognized over a weighted average period of
approximately three years.
 
68





Table
of Contents
 
A
summary of options outstanding and exercisable at September 28, 2008
follows (share amounts in thousands):
 



 


 


 


 


 


 


Options Outstanding


 


Options Exercisable


 




Range of


 


 


 


Weighted Average


 


Weighted


 


 


 


Weighted


 




Exercise Prices


 


Number


 


Remaining


 


Average


 


Number


 


Average


 




From


 


To


 


Outstanding


 


Life (in Years)


 


Exercise Price


 


Exercisable


 


Exercise Price


 




$


18.08


 


$


26.50


 


844


 


0.67


 


$


23.41


 


834


 


$


23.47


 




27.62


 


27.62


 


2,141


 


4.64


 


27.62


 


—


 


—


 




27.82


 


38.31


 


1,246


 


1.57


 


27.98


 


1,221


 


27.97


 




39.61


 


39.61


 


2,055


 


2.55


 


39.61


 


2,055


 


39.61


 




39.74


 


51.83


 


1,753


 


3.55


 


40.08


 


570


 


40.63


 




54.17


 


60.74


 


3,796


 


3.52


 


54.23


 


3,779


 


54.23


 




66.81


 


66.81


 


4,380


 


3.85


 


66.81


 


4,365


 


66.81


 




68.96


 


73.14


 


1,215


 


2.58


 


69.01


 


613


 


69.02


 




Total


 


 


 


17,430


 


3.29


 


$


48.64


 


13,437


 


$


51.88


 























 
Share-based payment
expense related to vesting stock options recognized during fiscal years 2008,
2007 and 2006 totaled approximately $10.5 million, $8.1 million, and $4.6
million, respectively.
 
To
adjust for actual experience, during fiscal year 2007 and fiscal year 2006 the
Company recognized an additional $4.4 million and $3.0 million, respectively,
as share-based payment charges related to the option acceleration that took
place in fiscal year 2005.
 
The
Company also recognized share-based payment expense totaling approximately $0.2
million, $0.3 million, and $1.2 million for modifications of terms of certain
stock option grants and other compensation during fiscal years 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively.
 
The fair value of stock
option grants has been estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes
option pricing model with the following weighted average assumptions:
 



 


 


2008


 


2007


 


2006


 




Expected
  dividend yield


 


2.90


%


1.80


%


1.26


%




Risk-free
  interest rate


 


2.32


%


4.75


%


5.04


%




Expected
  volatility


 


36.73


%


31.22


%


29.40


%




Expected life,
  in years


 


3.38


 


3.29


 


3.22


 



 
Risk-free interest rate
is based on the US treasury yield curve on the date of the grant for the time
period equal to the expected term of the grant. 
Expected volatility is calculated using a ratio of implied volatility
based on comparable Long-Term Equity Anticipation Securities (“LEAPS”) and
four-year historical volatility. The Company determined the use of implied
volatility versus historical volatility represents a more accurate calculation
of option fair value. Expected life is calculated in two tranches based on
weighted average percentage of unexpired options and exercise-after-vesting
information over the last five years. 
Unvested options are included in the term calculation using the “mid-point
scenario” which assumes that unvested options will be exercised half-way
between vest and expiration date. The assumptions
used to calculate the fair value of options granted are evaluated and revised,
as necessary, to reflect market conditions and experience.
 
In
addition to the above valuation assumptions, SFAS No. 123R requires the company to estimate an annual forfeiture
rate for unvested options and true up fair value expense accordingly.  The company monitors actual forfeiture
experience and adjusts the rate from time to time as necessary.
 
Team Member Stock Purchase Plan
 
Our
Company offers a team member stock purchase plan to all full-time team members
with a minimum of 400 hours of service. Participating team members may purchase
our common stock through payroll deductions. At the 2007 annual meeting,
shareholders approved a new TMSPP which became effective on April 1, 2007.
The TMSPP replaces all previous stock purchase plans and provides for a 5%
discount on the shares purchase date market value which meets the “Safe Harbor”
provisions of SFAS No. 123R and therefore is non-compensatory. As a
result, no future compensation expense will be recognized for our employee
stock purchase plan. Under the previous plans, participating team members could
elect to purchase unrestricted shares at 100% of market value or restricted
shares at 85% of market value on the purchase date.
 
69





Table
of Contents
 
In fiscal years 2007 and
2006 we recognized approximately $0.3 million and $0.6 million, respectively,
of share-based payments expense related to team member stock purchase plan
discounts. Under the TMSPP, we issued approximately 68,000, 83,000 and 51,000
shares in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.  At September 28, 2008, September 30,
2007 and September 24, 2006 approximately 218,000, 286,000, and 369,000
shares of our common stock, respectively, were available for future issuance.
 
(15) Team Member 401(k) Plan
 
Our Company offers a team member 401(k) plan to
all team members with a minimum of 1,000 services hours in one year.  In fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, the
Company made a matching contribution to the plan of approximately $3.0 million,
$2.3 million, and $2.3 million, respectively, in cash.
 
(16) Quarterly Results (unaudited)
 
The
Company’s first quarter consists of 16 weeks, and the second and third quarters
each are 12 weeks, and the fourth quarters is 12 or 13 weeks. Fiscal year 2008
is a 52-week year with twelve weeks in the fourth quarter. Fiscal year 2007 is
a 53-week year with thirteen weeks in the fourth quarter. Because the first
quarter is longer than the remaining quarters, it typically represents a larger
share of our annual sales from existing stores. Quarter to quarter comparisons
of results of operations have been and may be materially impacted by the timing
of new store openings. The Company believes that the following information
reflects all normal recurring adjustments necessary for a fair presentation of
the information for the periods presented. The operating results for any
quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period.
 
During
the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, “Relocation, store closure and lease
termination costs” include charges recorded totaling approximately $14.7
million to increase store closure reserves for increased estimated net lease
obligations for closed Wild Oats stores
and approximately $5.5 million in costs related to 13 lease terminations for
stores previously in development.
 
The Company’s effective tax rate for the fourth
quarter and fiscal year 2008 was higher than its historical rate primarily due
to repatriation of approximately $59.8 million in cash from the Company’s
Canadian subsidiary.
 
Operating
results for the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2007 include Wild Oats for the
period beginning August 28, 2007 through September 30, 2007.
 
70





Table
of Contents
 
The following tables set forth selected quarterly
unaudited consolidated statements of operations information for the fiscal
years ended September 28, 2008 and September 30, 2007 (in thousands
except per share amounts):
 



 


 


First


 


Second


 


Third


 


Fourth


 




 


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 




Fiscal
  Year 2008


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Sales


 


$


2,457,258


 


$


1,866,493


 


$


1,841,242


 


$


1,788,919


 




Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


1,630,706


 


1,215,089


 


1,208,495


 


1,192,917


 




Gross profit


 


826,552


 


651,404


 


632,747


 


596,002


 




Direct store
  expenses


 


644,375


 


496,903


 


490,188


 


476,474


 




General and
  administrative expenses


 


87,412


 


67,658


 


60,689


 


54,669


 




Pre-opening
  expenses


 


15,139


 


10,039


 


15,225


 


15,151


 




Relocation,
  store closure and lease termination costs


 


5,012


 


1,818


 


2,556


 


27,159


 




Operating income


 


74,614


 


74,986


 


64,089


 


22,549


 




Interest expense


 


(11,581


)


(8,438


)


(8,094


)


(8,303


)




Investment and
  other income


 


2,754


 


1,181


 


1,495


 


1,267


 




Income before
  income taxes


 


65,787


 


67,729


 


57,490


 


15,513


 




Provision for
  income taxes


 


26,644


 


27,769


 


23,571


 


14,011


 




Net income


 


$


39,143


 


$


39,960


 


$


33,919


 


$


1,502


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings
  per share


 


$


0.28


 


$


0.29


 


$


0.24


 


$


0.01


 




Diluted earnings
  per share


 


$


0.28


 


$


0.29


 


$


0.24


 


$


0.01


 




Dividends
  declared per share


 


$


0.20


 


$


0.20


 


$


0.20


 


$


—


 



 



 


 


First


 


Second


 


Third


 


Fourth


 




 


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 


Quarter


 




Fiscal
  Year 2007


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Sales


 


$


1,870,731


 


$


1,463,210


 


$


1,514,420


 


$


1,743,412


 




Cost of goods
  sold and occupancy costs


 


1,229,972


 


948,738


 


976,130


 


1,140,330


 




Gross profit


 


640,759


 


514,472


 


538,290


 


603,082


 




Direct store
  expenses


 


482,797


 


379,295


 


394,713


 


454,424


 




General and
  administrative expenses


 


56,132


 


45,456


 


49,003


 


67,152


 




Pre-opening
  expenses


 


13,255


 


13,744


 


13,719


 


18,601


 




Relocation,
  store closure and lease termination costs


 


3,029


 


1,890


 


1,276


 


4,666


 




Operating income


 


85,546


 


74,087


 


79,579


 


58,239


 




Interest expense


 


(7


)


—


 


(24


)


(4,177


)




Investment and
  other income


 


4,052


 


2,562


 


2,223


 


2,487


 




Income before
  income taxes


 


89,591


 


76,649


 


81,778


 


56,549


 




Provision for
  income taxes


 


35,836


 


30,660


 


32,711


 


22,620


 




Net income


 


$


53,755


 


$


45,989


 


$


49,067


 


$


33,929


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Basic earnings
  per share


 


$


0.38


 


$


0.33


 


$


0.35


 


$


0.24


 




Diluted earnings
  per share


 


$


0.38


 


$


0.32


 


$


0.35


 


$


0.24


 




Dividends
  declared per share


 


$


0.33


 


$


0.18


 


$


0.18


 


$


0.18


 



 
(17) Commitments and Contingencies
 
The Company uses a combination of insurance and
self-insurance plans to provide for the potential liabilities for workers’
compensation, general liability, property insurance, director and officers’
liability insurance, vehicle liability and employee health care benefits.
Liabilities associated with the risks that are retained by the Company are
estimated, in part, by considering historical claims experience, demographic
factors, severity factors and other actuarial assumptions. While we believe
that our assumptions are appropriate, the estimated accruals for these
liabilities could be significantly affected if future occurrences and claims
differ from these assumptions and historical trends.
 
From time to time we are
a party to legal proceedings including matters involving personnel and
employment issues, personal injury, intellectual property, real estate and
other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. The Company has
established loss provisions for matters in which losses are probable and the
amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. The Company does not believe that
any of these proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business, either
alone or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s
results of operations, cash flows or financial condition. Although management
does not expect that the outcome in these proceedings will have a material
adverse effect on our 
 
71





Table
of Contents
 
financial condition or
results of operations, litigation is inherently unpredictable.  Therefore, we could incur judgments or enter
into settlements of claims that could materially impact our results.
 
On July 17, 2007,
the Company announced that the Company’s Board of Directors had formed a
Special Committee to perform an independent internal investigation regarding
the online financial message board postings related to Whole Foods Market and
Wild Oats Markets and retained the firm of Munger, Tolles & Olson LLP
to advise it during its investigation. The result of the Company’s internal
investigation had no impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements
for the year ended September 30, 2007. 
The Company has been contacted by the staff of the Securities and
Exchange Commission advising the Company that it has concluded its inquiry
related to online financial message board postings related to Whole Foods
Market and Wild Oats Markets and that no enforcement action has been
recommended against the Company or any individual.
 
On July 29, 2008,
the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
reversed the August 16, 2007 decision of the United States
District Court for the District of Columbia which had denied the FTC
motion for a preliminary injunction against the acquisition of Wild Oats
Markets by Whole Foods Market.   The Company petition for rehearing
of the July 29th decision by the entire DC Circuit Court of
Appeals was denied. The case is to be remanded to the District Court for
further proceedings. On remand the FTC may renew its motion for some
preliminary injunctive relief pending resolution of the administrative action.
In addition, the FTC is currently pursuing an administrative proceeding
concerning our recent acquisition of Wild Oats Markets. These proceedings are
discussed in further detail in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements,
“Business Combination.” Whole Foods Market cannot at this time predict the
likely outcome of these judicial and administrative proceedings or estimate the
amount or range of loss or possible loss that may arise from them.  The
Company has not accrued any loss related to the outcome of these proceedings as
of September 28, 2008.
 
Subsequent to year end,
on October 27, 2008, Whole Foods Market was served with the complaint
in Kottaras v. Whole Foods Market, Inc., a putative class action filed in
the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, seeking treble
damages, equitable, injunctive, and declaratory relief and alleging that the
acquisition and merger between Whole Foods Market and Wild Oats violates
various provisions of the federal antitrust laws. The Company has not accrued
any loss related to the outcome of this case as of September 28, 2008.
 
The Company has entered
into Retention Agreements with certain executive officers of the Company or its
subsidiaries which provide for certain benefits upon an involuntary termination
of employment, other than for cause, after a “Triggering Event.” A Triggering
Event includes a merger of the Company with and into an unaffiliated
corporation if the Company is not the surviving corporation or the sale of all
or substantially all of the Company’s assets. The benefits to be received by
the executive officer whose employment is terminated after a Triggering Event
occurs include receipt of his or her annual salary through the one-year period
following the date of the termination of employment and the immediate vesting
of any outstanding stock options granted to such executive officer.
 
(18) Subsequent Event
 
On November 5, 2008,
the Company entered into an agreement to issue approximately 425,000 shares of Series A
8% Redeemable, Convertible Preferred Stock, $0.01 par value per share (“Series A
Preferred Stock”) to Green Equity Investors V, L.P., an affiliate of Leonard
Green & Partners, L.P., for $425 million. The Series A Preferred
Stock has an 8% dividend, payable quarterly in cash or by increasing the
liquidation preference, at the option of the Company, and will be convertible,
under certain circumstances, to common stock at an initial conversion rate of
$68.9655 per $1,000 of the liquidation preference, or an initial conversion
price of $14.50 per common share.  After
three years, the dividend will be reduced to: (i) 6% if the common stock
closes at or above $17.75 per share for at least 20 consecutive trading days,
or (ii) 4% if the common stock closes at or above $23.13 per share for at
least 20 consecutive trading days.  The
Company may redeem the Series A Preferred Stock after five years at a
premium of 4%, declining ratably to par by the eighth year. Additionally, at
any time, the Company may, upon 30 days notice, redeem the Series A
Preferred Stock if the common stock closes at or above $28.50 per share for at
least 20 consecutive trading days.  The
Company also has the option to convert the Series A Preferred Stock into
subordinated convertible notes having economic terms similar to the preferred
stock under certain circumstances. The closing and funding of the transaction
is subject to certain customary closing conditions, including the receipt of
customary regulatory approvals. There can be no assurance that these approvals
will be received.
 
72





Table
of Contents
 
Item 9.    Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants
on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
 
None.
 
Item 9A.     Controls and Procedures.
 
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls
and Procedures
 
The Company’s management,
with the participation of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief
Financial Officer, has evaluated the effectiveness of the Company’s disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)) as of the
end of the period covered by this report. Based on such evaluation, the Company’s
Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that, as of
the end of such period, the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures were
effective as of the end of the period covered by this report.
 
Changes in Internal Control over
Financial Reporting
 
There have been no
changes in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting (as defined
in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) during
the most recent fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably
likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control over financial
reporting.
 
Management’s Report on Internal
Control over Financial Reporting
 
The Company’s management
is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under
the Exchange Act.
 
Because of its inherent
limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to
future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the
policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
Under the supervision and
with the participation of the Company’s management, including our principal
executive officer and principal financial officer, the Company conducted an
evaluation of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial
reporting based on criteria established in the framework in Internal Control — Integrated Framework
issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
Based on this evaluation, the Company’s management concluded that its internal
control over financial reporting was effective as of September 28, 2008.
 
The Company’s independent
registered public accounting firm, Ernst & Young LLP, audited the
effectiveness of management’s assessment of internal control over financial
reporting and also independently assessed the effectiveness of our internal
control over financial reporting. Ernst & Young LLP has issued their
attestation report which is included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report on Form 10-K.
 
Item 9B.     Other Information.
 
Not applicable.
 
73





Table
of Contents
 
PART III
 
Item 10.   Directors
and Executive Officers of the Registrant.
 
The information required
by this item about our Company’s Executive Officers is included in Part I,
“Item 1. Business” of this Report on Form 10-K under the caption “Executive
Officers of the Registrant.” All other information required by this item is
incorporated herein by reference from the registrant’s definitive Proxy
Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held March 16, 2009
to be filed with the Commission pursuant to Regulation 14A.
 
The Company has
adopted a Code of Conduct and Ethics for Team Members and Directors pursuant to
section 406 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. A copy of our Code of Conduct and Ethics
is publicly available on our Company website at
http://www.wholefoodsmarket.com/company/pdfs/codeofconduct.pdf  The information contained on our website is
not incorporated by reference into this Report on Form 10-K.
 
Item 11.   Executive Compensation.
 
The information required
by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the registrant’s
definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 
Item 12.   Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management.
 
The information required
by this item about our Company’s securities authorized for issuance under
equity compensation plans as of September 28, 2008 is included in Part I,
“Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities” of this Report on Form 10-K. All
other information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference
from the registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of
Shareholders.
 
Item 13.   Certain
Relationships and Related Transactions.
 
The information required
by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the registrant’s
definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 
Item 14.   Principal
Accounting Fees and Services.
 
The information required
by this item is incorporated herein by reference from the registrant’s
definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 
74





Table
of Contents
 
PART IV
 
Item 15.   Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.
 
(a)           The following documents are filed as
part of this report:
 
(1)   Consolidated Financial Statements: See
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
(2)   Financial Statement Schedules: No
schedules are required.
(3)   Exhibits are incorporated herein by
reference or are filed with this report as indicated below
 
(b)           Exhibits
 
3.1      Amended
and Restated Articles of Incorporation of the Registrant (5)
3.2                     Amended and
Restated By-laws of the Registrant adopted August 13, 2008 (7)
4.1                     Form of
Zero Coupon Convertible Subordinated Debentures Due 2018 (3)
10.1    Form of
Retention Agreement between the executive officers of the Registrant and the
Registrant (2)
10.2    Form of
amendment to Retention Agreement (1)
10.3    Form of
Director & Officer Indemnification Agreement (6)
10.4    1993
Team Member Stock Ownership Plan (1)
10.5    1993
Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (1)
10.6    1992
Stock Option Plan for Team Members, as amended (1)
10.7    1992
Stock Option Plan for Outside Directors (1)
10.8    2007
Stock Incentive Plan (10)
10.9    Amendment
No. One to the Whole Foods Market 2007 Stock Incentive Plan (7)
10.10  2007
Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (11)
10.11  Agreement
for Distribution of Products by and between Whole Foods Market Distribution, Inc.
and United Natural Foods, Inc. (Portions of this agreement have been
omitted pursuant to a request for confidential treatment filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission) (8)
10.12  Agreement
and Plan of Merger dated as of February 21, 2007, by and among Registrant
and Wild Oats Markets, Inc. (4)
10.13  Term
Loan Agreement dated August 28, 2007 by and among Registrant, Royal Bank
of Canada; JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.; Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; Wachovia Bank,
N.A.; LaSalle Bank Midwest, N.A.;  RBC Capital Markets; and J.P. Morgan
Securities Inc. (9)
10.14  Revolving
Credit Agreement dated August 28, 2007 by and among Registrant, JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A.; Royal Bank of Canada; Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; J.P. Morgan
Securities Inc.; and RBC Capital Markets (9)
10.15  First
Amendment, dated June 2, 2008, of Revolving Credit Agreement dated August 28,
2007 by and among Registrant, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.; Royal Bank of Canada;
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; J.P. Morgan Securities Inc.; and RBC Capital Markets
(Portions of this Agreement have been omitted pursuant to a request for
Confidential Treatment filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission) (7)
12.1    Computation
of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges (12)
21.1    Subsidiaries
of the Registrant (12)
23.1    Consent
of Ernst & Young LLP (12)
31.1
   Certification by Chief Executive Officer pursuant to 17 CFR
240.13a-14(a) (12)
31.2    Certification
by Chief Financial Officer pursuant to 17 CFR 240.13a-14(a) (12)
32.1    Certification
by Chief Executive Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 (12)
32.2    Certification
by Chief Financial Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 (12)
 

(1)      Filed
as an exhibit to Registration Statement on Form S-4 (No. 33-63824)
and incorporated herein by reference.
(2)      Filed
as an exhibit to Registration Statement on Form S-1 (No. 33-44214) and
incorporated herein by reference.
(3)      Filed
as an exhibit to Registration Statement on Form S-3, filed April 30,
1998 (No. 333-51419) and incorporated herein by reference.
(4)      Filed
as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 8-K filed February 21, 2007 and
incorporated herein by reference.
(5)      Filed
as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-Q for the period ended April 9,
2006 filed May 19, 2006 and incorporated herein by reference.
(6)      Filed
as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-Q for the period ended January 20,
2008 filed February 29, 2008 and incorporated herein by reference.
(7)      Filed
as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-Q for the period ended July 6,
2008 filed August 15, 2008 and incorporated herein by reference
 
75





Table
of Contents
 
(8)      Filed
as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-K for the period ended September 24,
2006 filed December 8, 2006 and incorporated herein by reference.
(9)      Filed
as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-K for the period ended September 30,
2007 filed November 29, 2007 and incorporated herein by reference.
(10)    Filed
as Appendix B to Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting
of Stockholders to be held March 5, 2007 filed January 22, 2007 and
incorporated herein by reference.
(11)    Filed
as Appendix C to Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting
of Stockholders to be held March 5, 2007 filed January 22, 2007 and
incorporated herein by reference.
(12)    Filed
herewith.
 
76





Table
of Contents
 
SIGNATURES
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.
 
WHOLE FOODS MARKET, INC.
 



Date: November 26,
  2008


 


By:


/s/ Glenda Chamberlain




 


 


 


Glenda Chamberlain




 


 


 


Executive Vice
  President and Chief Financial Officer




 


 


 


 




Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
  this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
  registrant and in the capacities indicated on November 26, 2008.




 




Name


 


Title


 




 


 


 


 




/s/ John P. Mackey


 


 


 




John P. Mackey


 


Chairman of the Board,
  Chief Executive Officer and Director




 


 


(Principal Executive Officer)


 




 


 


 


 




/s/ Glenda Chamberlain


 


 


 




Glenda Chamberlain


 


Executive Vice
  President and Chief Financial Officer


 




 


 


(Principal Financial
  and Accounting Officer)


 




 


 


 


 




/s/ Dr. John B.
  Elstrott


 


 


 




Dr. John B.
  Elstrott


 


Director


 




 


 


 


 




/s/ Gabrielle E. Greene


 


 


 




Gabrielle E. Greene


 


Director


 




 


 


 


 




/s/ Shahid M. Hassan


 


 


 




Shahid M. Hassan


 


Director


 




 


 


 


 




/s/ Morris J. Siegel


 


 


 




Morris J. Siegel


 


Director


 




 


 


 


 




/s/ Dr. Ralph Z.
  Sorenson


 


 


 




Dr. Ralph Z.
  Sorenson


 


Director


 











 
77





