
10-K/A
1
d10ka.htm
AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO FORM 10-K

Amendment No. 1 to Form 10-K
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
 UNITED STATES  SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549      FORM 10-K/A  (Amendment No. 1)     
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF  THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934    FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 26, 2004    COMMISSION FILE NUMBER: 0-19797      WHOLE FOODS MARKET, INC.  (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)     






Texas
 
74-1989366

 (State of incorporation)
 
 (IRS Employer Identification No.)
   550 Bowie St.
 Austin, Texas 78703  (Address of principal executive offices)    Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:  512-477-4455    Securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the Act: 
Common Stock, no par value  Preferred Stock Purchase Rights      Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90
days.    Yes  x    No  ¨    Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation
S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form
10-K.  ¨    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).    Yes  x    No  ¨     The aggregate market value of all common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of April 8, 2004 was $4,404,717,416. 
  The number of shares of the registrant’s common stock, no par value, outstanding as
of November 30, 2004 was 62,593,744.   


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
EXPLANATORY NOTE    This Amendment No. 1 to the Annual Report on Form 10-K for Whole Foods Market, Inc. (the “Company”) for the fiscal year ended
September 26, 2004 as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 10, 2004 is being filed to correct previously issued financial statements for fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002. The corrections are to account for rent holidays and
tenant improvement allowances, and for determining lives used in the calculation of depreciation of leasehold improvements and straight-line rent determination for certain leased properties in a manner consistent with views recently expressed by the
SEC and other recent interpretations. See Note 3 to the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements for additional discussion. Information not affected by the restatement is unchanged and reflects the disclosures made at the time of the
original filing of the Form 10-K on December 10, 2004.     
2 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Annual Report on Form 10-K  For the Fiscal Year Ended September 26, 2004    Table of Contents   








 
  
 
  
PageNumber

 
  

PART I 
  
 

Item 1.
  

Business.
  
4

Item 2.
  

Properties.
  
17

Item 3.
  

Legal Proceedings.
  
17

Item 4.
  

Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders.
  
17





 
  

PART II 
  
 





Item 5.
  

Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
  
18

Item 6.
  

Selected Financial Data.
  
19

Item 7.
  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
  
21

Item 7A.
  

Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
  
27

Item 8.
  

Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
  
29

Item 9.
  

Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
  
52

Item 9A.
  

Controls and Procedures.
  
52

Item 9B.
  

Other Information.
  
53





 
  

PART III 
  
 





Item 10.
  

Directors and Executive Officers of the Registrant.
  
54

Item 11.
  

Executive Compensation.
  
55

Item 12.
  

Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management.
  
57

Item 13.
  

Certain Relationships and Related Transactions.
  
58

Item 14.
  

Principal Accounting Fees and Services.
  
58





 
  

PART IV 
  
 





Item 15.
  

Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules. 
  
60





SIGNATURES 
  
61
  
3 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
This Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the
Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 concerning our current expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections about the future. These forward-looking statements are based on currently available operating, financial and competitive information and
are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements. See “Item 1. Business - Additional Factors that May Affect Future Results.” for a
discussion of risks and uncertainties that may affect our business.    
PART I    
Item 1. Business.    General    Whole Foods Market, Inc. owns and operates the largest chain of natural and organic food
stores. Our Company mission is to promote vitality and well-being for all individuals by supplying the highest quality, most wholesome foods available. Since the purity of our food and the health of our bodies are directly related to the purity and
health of our environment, our core mission is devoted to the promotion of organically grown foods, food safety concern and sustainability of our entire eco-system. Through our growth, we have had a large and positive impact on the natural and
organic foods movement throughout the United States, helping lead the industry to nationwide acceptance over the last 24 years.    Whole Foods Market, Inc. is a Texas corporation incorporated in 1980. Whole Foods Market is based in Austin, Texas and conducts business through various wholly-owned
subsidiaries. Unless otherwise specified, references in this Report to Whole Foods Market or the Company include its consolidated subsidiaries. We operate in one reportable segment, natural and organic foods supermarkets.    We opened our first store in Austin, Texas in 1980. As of September 26, 2004, we operated 163
stores: 154 stores in 28 U.S. states and the District of Columbia; two stores in Canada; and seven stores in the United Kingdom. Our sales have grown rapidly through new store openings, acquisitions and comparable store sales growth, from
approximately $92 million in fiscal year 1991, excluding the effect of pooling-of-interests transactions completed since 1991, to approximately $3.9 billion in fiscal year 2004, a compounded annual growth rate of approximately 33%. Our stores
average approximately 32,000 square feet in size and approximately $25 million in annual sales. Our stores are supported by regional distribution centers, bakehouse facilities, commissary kitchens, seafood-processing facilities, produce procurement
centers and a coffee roasting operation.    Our goal is to become an
international brand synonymous with not just natural and organic foods, but with being the best food retailer in every community in which we are located. We believe our heavy emphasis on perishable products is helping us reach that goal,
differentiating our stores from conventional supermarkets and enabling us to attract a broader customer base. Perishable product sales accounted for approximately 67% of our total retail sales in fiscal year 2004. We believe that all shoppers, not
just natural and organic food shoppers, appreciate great produce, dairy, meat, seafood, bakery and prepared foods, and it is our strength of execution in perishables that has attracted many of our most loyal customers.    The Natural Products Industry    According to a leading trade publication for the industry, sales of natural products across
all channels grew to over $43 billion in 2003, an 8% increase over the prior year. The natural and organic products we offer in our stores include food and beverages, dietary supplements, personal care products, household goods, and related
educational products. We believe that sales growth for natural and organic foods is being driven by numerous factors, including:   


 
•
 
heightened awareness of the role that food and nutrition play in long-term health, which has led to healthier eating patterns;   


 
•
 
a better-educated populace whose median age is increasing each year;   


 
•
 
increasing consumer concern over the purity and safety of food due to the presence of pesticide residues, growth hormones, artificial ingredients and other chemicals, and
genetically engineered ingredients; and   


 
•
 
environmental concerns due to the degradation of water and soil quality.   
4 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Natural foods can be defined as foods that are minimally processed, largely or completely free of artificial ingredients,
preservatives and other non-naturally occurring chemicals and as near to their whole, natural state as possible. Organic products are grown through methods intended to support and enhance the earth’s natural balance. Generally, organic food
products are produced using:   


 
•
 
agricultural management practices intended to promote and enhance eco-system health;   


 
•
 
no genetically-engineered seeds or crops, sewage sludge, long-lasting pesticides, herbicides or fungicides;   


 
•
 
livestock management practices intended to promote healthy, humanely treated animals by providing organically-grown feed, fresh air and outdoor access while using no antibiotics or
growth hormones; and   


 
•
 
food processing practices intended to protect the integrity of the organic product and disallow irradiation, genetically modified organisms (“GMOs”) or synthetic
preservatives.    Organic Rule    On October 21, 2002, the United States Department of Agriculture’s (“USDA”)
Organic Rule was implemented into Federal law. The Organic Rule was created to address the rapid, consistent growth of the organics industry over the past 20-plus years and the need for a set of national organic standards to serve as clear
guidelines as to what is considered organic for the industry and its customers. Under the Organic Rule, all products labeled as “organic” in any form must now be certified by a USDA-accredited certifying agency. Furthermore, retailers,
including Whole Foods Market, which handle, store, and sell organic products must implement measures to protect their organic integrity by:   


 
•
 
preventing the commingling of organic and conventional products;   


 
•
 
protecting organic products from contact with prohibited substances (such as sanitation and pest control products);   


 
•
 
labeling organic products properly and clearly; and   


 
•
 
keeping proper records with regard to organic handling procedures and vendor relationships.    Whole Foods Market has taken an active leadership role in the development of the national organic standards. Margaret Wittenberg, our Vice
President of Marketing and Public Affairs, served on the National Organic Standards Board (NOSB) from 1995 to 2000. The NOSB members were appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture to act as industry advisors to the USDA’s National Organic
Program, developing the standards and protocols that form the backbone of the USDA’s Organic Rule. As the sole retail representative on the NOSB, Ms. Wittenberg contributed a broad, realistic perspective on how the standards could work most
effectively at the retail level.    Whole Foods Market has been devoted to
protecting organic integrity for years, and we are pleased to have the USDA’s Organic Rule as a guiding standard. In May of 2003, Whole Foods Market became America’s first national “Certified Organic” grocer through certification
from Quality Assurance International (“QAI”), a federally recognized independent third-party certification organization. This voluntary certification tells our customers that we have gone the extra mile by not only following the
USDA’s Organic Rule, but following a strict set of operating procedures designed to ensure that the products we sell and label as organic are indeed organic – procedures that are not specifically required by the Organic Rule. 
  QAI’s Organic Certification Program for Retailers verifies businesses handle organic
goods according to stringent national guidelines, from receipt through re-packing to final sale to customers. To receive certification, retailers must agree to adhere to a strict set of standards set forth by the USDA, submit documentation, and open
their facilities to on-site inspections – all designed to assure Americans that the chain of organic integrity is preserved. The certification is one more example of our commitment to the promotion of organic agriculture and the integrity of
the certified organic label. Based on QAI’s annual review of our operating procedures, including inspections of our stores and warehouses, our certification is extended through July 2005.    Business Strategy     Whole Foods Market is the largest retailer of natural and organic products. We believe that
much of our success to date is because we remain a uniquely mission-driven company. We are highly selective about what we sell. We believe in providing   
5 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
an empowering work environment for our team members, and we are committed to sustainable agriculture. We believe in a
virtuous circle entwining the food chain, human beings, and the earth; each reliant upon the other through a delicate symbiosis.    Whole Foods    We obtain our products locally and from all over the world, often from small, uniquely dedicated food artisans. We strive to offer the highest quality, least processed, most flavorful and naturally preserved foods. We
believe that food in its purest state – unadulterated by artificial additives, sweeteners, colorings and preservatives – is the best tasting and most nutritious food available.    Whole People    We recruit the best people we can to become part of our team. We empower them to make many operational decisions, creating a respectful workplace where team members are
treated fairly and are highly motivated to succeed. We look for team members who are passionate about food but also well-rounded human beings who can play a critical role in helping to build our stores into profitable and beneficial parts of their
communities.    Whole Planet    We believe companies, like individuals, must assume their share of responsibility for our
planet. We actively support organic farming on a global basis because we believe it is the best method for promoting sustainable agriculture and protecting the environment and farm workers. On a local basis, we are actively involved in our
communities by supporting food banks, sponsoring neighborhood events, and contributing at least 5% of our after-tax profits in the form of cash or products to not-for-profit organizations.    Core Values    Our core values reflect what is truly important to us as an organization. They are the underpinning of our corporate culture and the soul of
our Company. They transcend our size and growth rate, so regardless of how large we become, by maintaining our core values, we are able to preserve what has always been special about our Company. Our five stated core values include:   


•
 
selling the highest quality natural and organic products available;   


•
 
satisfying and delighting our customers;   


•
 
team member happiness and excellence;   


•
 
creating wealth through profits and growth; and   


•
 
caring about our communities and our environment.    These core values speak to our belief in a balanced way of doing business. We consider all five equal in importance and deserving of equal consideration and attention. We
believe that, together, our focus on natural and organic products, our loyal customers, creative team members, shareholders who support our mission, and communities that welcome our participation set us apart from other natural and conventional food
retailers.    Growth Strategy    Whole Foods Market’s growth strategy is to expand through a combination of new store
openings and acquisitions of existing stores. We have a disciplined, opportunistic real estate and acquisition strategy, opening or acquiring stores in existing trade areas as well as new markets. Our new stores typically range between 40,000 to
60,000 square feet and are located on premium real estate sites. We have also grown through acquisitions, with approximately 33% of our store base consisting of acquired stores. Because the natural foods retailing industry is highly fragmented and
comprised of many smaller local and regional chains, we may continue to pursue acquisitions of smaller chains that provide access to desirable markets, locations and experienced team members. Such acquisitions, however, are expected to have less of
an impact on our future store growth and financial results than they have had in the past primarily due to the growing base size of the Company.   
6 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
We typically relocate a small number of our stores each fiscal year to larger locations with improved visibility and
parking. For stores relocated in fiscal years 1999 through 2004, the overall average increase in size was approximately 95%. Our historical store growth is summarized below:   



















 
  
2004
 
 
2003
 
 
2002
 
 
2001
 
 
2000
 

 Stores at beginning of fiscal year
  
145
 
 
135
 
 
126
 
 
117
 
 
100
 

 Stores opened
  
12
 
 
12
 
 
11
 
 
12
 
 
17
 

 Acquired stores
  
7
 
 
—  
 
 
3
 
 
—  
 
 
3
 

 Relocations and closures
  
(1
)
 
(2
)
 
(5
)
 
(3
)
 
(3
)

 
  


 


 


 


 



 Stores at end of fiscal year
  
163
 
 
145
 
 
135
 
 
126
 
 
117
 

 
  


 


 


 


 



 Total square footage at end of fiscal year (in thousands)
  
5,145
 
 
4,545
 
 
4,098
 
 
3,598
 
 
3,180
 

 
  


 


 


 


 


   As of November 10, 2004, we had signed
leases for 53 stores averaging approximately 49,000 square feet in size, which is approximately 55% larger than our existing store base average. Square footage under development at November 10, 2004 was approximately 2.6 million, equal to
approximately 50% of our existing store base.    Products    We have a broad product selection with a strong emphasis on perishable foods designed to
appeal to both natural foods and gourmet shoppers. Most of our products are from natural food vendors; however, we do sell a limited selection of conventional national brands that meet our quality standards.    Quality Standards    A primary part of our Company mission is to promote vitality and well-being for all individuals by supplying the highest quality, most
wholesome foods available. We evaluate quality in terms of nutrition, freshness, appearance and taste. Our search for quality is a never-ending process involving the careful judgment of buyers throughout the Company.   


 
•
 
We carefully evaluate each and every product that we sell.   


 
•
 
We feature foods that are free from artificial preservatives, colors, flavors and sweeteners.   


 
•
 
We are passionate about great tasting food and the pleasure of sharing it with each other.   


 
•
 
We are committed to foods that are fresh, wholesome and safe to eat.   


 
•
 
We seek out and promote organically grown foods.   


 
•
 
We strive to provide food and nutritional products that support health and well-being.    Our standards require that seafood comes from deep, clean, clear waters or from aquaculture farms where environmental concerns are a
priority, and our seafood is never treated with chlorine or other chemicals, which is common practice in the food retailing industry. In addition, Whole Foods Market has championed innovative production standards to improve the quality and safety of
the meat and poultry sold in our stores, while also supporting the better treatment and health of the animals. Animal welfare requirements currently mandatory for any meat and poultry sold by the Whole Foods Market include:   


 
•
 
no antibiotics or added growth hormones;   


 
•
 
an annual affidavit from each producer outlining the raising and handling practices, feed, facility design, environmental conditions, employee training, medical practices and animal
welfare at the farm, in transportation and throughout processing;   


 
•
 
annual inspection of each producer by Whole Foods Market; and   


 
•
 
successful completion of an independent third-party food safety audit of each processing plant and a humane slaughter audit according to a rating system developed by renowned animal
welfare and facility design expert Dr. Temple Grandin.   
7 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
In October 2003, we announced plans to create farm animal treatment standards that go above and beyond these existing
strict standards. The new standards of production and processing are being developed in cooperation with producers, animal welfare advocacy groups, animal welfare scientists, and an independent third-party food safety auditor. The next phase of our
animal welfare standards underscores the Company’s belief that the needs of an animal should be the first criteria in the development of standards, with focus on providing environments and conditions for each species that support the
animal’s natural physical needs, behavior and well-being. Products meeting the utmost standard will be labeled “animal compassionate.” Work on our new “animal compassionate” standards started in November 2003 with the
development of enhanced animal welfare standards for ducks. Work is continuing on enhanced standards for pigs and sheep, with the development of standards for other species to follow.    Product Categories    Our product categories include, but are not limited to: produce, seafood, grocery, meat and poultry, bakery, prepared foods and catering, specialty (beer, wine and
cheese), whole body (nutritional supplements, vitamins, body care and educational products such as books), floral, pet products and household products.    Perishable products, defined as food and other products subject to spoilage, accounted for approximately 67% of our total retail sales in fiscal year 2004, up from
approximately 57% of our total retail sales 10 years ago. We believe our heavy emphasis on perishable products differentiates us from conventional supermarkets and helps us to attract a broader customer base. We believe that all shoppers, not just
natural and organic food shoppers, appreciate great produce, dairy, meat, seafood, bakery and prepared foods. We believe it is our strength of execution in perishables that has attracted many of our most loyal shoppers.    Private Label Products    Because of the relative lack of national brands within the natural products marketplace, we believe we have a unique private label
opportunity. We have taken advantage of this opportunity and over the last several years have expanded our private label offerings, which currently feature over 1,000 SKUs and comprise four corporate brands (365 Everyday Value, Whole Kids Organic,
365 Organic and the Whole Brands family), as well as the Authentic Food Artisan (AFA) program. In addition to these nationally-driven programs, we have a number of store-made and regionally-made fresh items sold under the Whole Foods Market label.
We also offer specialty and organic coffees and teas through our Allegro Coffee Company subsidiary. Our private label sales in grocery and nutrition accounted for approximately 14% of our total sales in those product categories in fiscal year 2004.
  


•
 
365 Everyday Value. In 1997, we introduced a line of products under the “365” label emphasizing everyday value. These products meet our quality standards but are
generally less expensive than the alternative products we sell. Our qualitative and quantitative research indicates that the “365” line is a highly recognized and trusted brand with Whole Foods Market shoppers.   


•
 
Whole Kids Organic. In 1998, we introduced the country’s first organic food product line developed just for children under the “Whole Kids” label. Whole Kids
Organic offers great tasting items, from applesauce and peanut butter to pasta sauce and string cheese, crafted expressly for a child’s discerning palate.   


•
 
365 Organic Everyday Value. In 2002, we expanded our private label program with the introduction of our “365 Organic” line. The “365 Organic” brand
provides all of the benefits of organic food at reduced prices. Certified organic products are purchased in large quantities so that the savings may be passed on to our customers. In 2003, we expanded this program into non-grocery departments,
including a successful line of organic fresh vegetables.    


•
 
Authentic Food Artisan. In 2003, we introduced our Authentic Food Artisan (AFA) program. This program recognizes distinctive products that are made using traditional methods.
Potential items for the AFA program are reviewed on a quarterly basis, specifically chosen for their superior taste and commitment to artisanal, small-scale production methods. The line includes olive oils, cheese, wine, pasta, vinegar, rice and
honey, among other items.   


•
 
Whole Brands. In September 2004, we introduced a new family of “Whole Brands,” each aligned with department-specific quality and sourcing standards. Included under
the “Whole Brands” umbrella are “Whole Kitchen” for frozen grocery, “Whole Treat” for frozen desserts and candies, “Whole Catch” for frozen seafood items, and “Whole Fields” for produce and produce
support items. These brands go beyond the basics, offering unique items that embody our high quality standards and supplement our base value line of 365 and 365 Organic items. Items in the “Whole” family share a consistent logo format and
packaging so that our customers know each is part of a greater family.   
8 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Store Operations    Team Approach to Store Operations    We strive to promote a strong company culture featuring a team approach to store operations that we believe is distinctly more empowering of employees than that of the
traditional supermarket. Our domestic stores each employ between 80 and 485 team members who are organized into up to 11 teams per store, each led by a team leader. Each team within a store is responsible for a different product category or aspect
of store operations such as customer service, prepared foods, or grocery, among other things. Together with our regional framework, we promote a decentralized team approach to store operations in which many of the personnel, merchandising and
operating decisions are made by teams at the individual store level. Because of our management structure, an effective store team leader is critical to the success of the store. The store team leader works closely with one or more associate store
team leaders, as well as with all of the department team leaders, to operate the store as efficiently and profitably as possible. Members of store leadership are paid a salary plus an Economic Value Added (“EVA”™) based bonus and are eligible to receive stock options.    We believe team members are inspired by work that provides them with a greater sense of
purpose and mission. For many team members, their job with us is an extension of their personal philosophy and lifestyle. Many team members have said they are contributing to the good of others by selling clean and nutritious foods, by contributing
to long-term sustainable agriculture and by promoting a pesticide-free and healthier environment. For the past seven years, our team members have helped Fortune magazine select us as one of the “100 Best Companies to Work for in
America.”    Every year our team members have the opportunity to complete a
Morale Survey. In 2004, the overall participation rate was 63%. Topics covered by the survey include job satisfaction, opportunity and empowerment, pay, training and benefits. Of the team members responding in 2004, 86% said they almost always or
frequently enjoy their job (level with last year), and 82% said they almost always or frequently feel empowered to do their best work at Whole Foods Market (up from 81% last year). In response to the question, “What is the best thing about
working at Whole Foods Market?,” common responses included co-workers, customers, flexibility, work environment, growth and learning opportunities, the products we sell, benefits, the team concept, and culture of empowerment.    We strive to create a Company-wide consciousness of “shared fate” by uniting the
self-interests of team members as closely as possible to the self-interests of our shareholders. One way we reinforce this concept is through a gainsharing program rewarding a team’s labor productivity. We also encourage stock ownership among
team members through the following programs:   


 
•
 
Team Member Stock Option Plan. Team members are eligible for stock options through seniority, promotion or at the discretion of senior regional or national leadership.
  


 
•
 
Team Member Stock Purchase Plan. Team members can purchase restricted stock at a discount (or unrestricted stock without a discount) through payroll deductions.
  


 
•
 
Team Member 401(k) Plan. Whole Foods Market stock is an investment option within the Company’s 401(k) plan.    Store Description    We do not have a standard store design model. Instead, each store’s design is customized to fit the size and configuration of the
particular location and community in which it is located. We strive to transform food shopping from a chore into a dynamic experience by building and operating stores with colorful décor, well-trained team members, exciting product mixes,
teams of in-store chefs, ever-changing selections, samples, open kitchens, scratch bakeries, hand-stacked produce, prepared foods stations and European-style charcuterie departments. To further a sense of community and interaction with customers,
our stores typically include sit-down eating areas, customer comment boards and customer service booths. We have “Take Action” centers for our customers who want to be informed on important issues relative to environmental, legislative,
food safety and product quality issues that can directly affect our customers’ health and well-being. In addition, some stores offer special services such as massage, valet parking and home delivery. We believe our stores play a unique role as
a third place, besides the home and office, where people can gather, interact and learn while at the same time discovering the many joys of eating and sharing food.   
9 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Site Selection    Most of our stores are located in high-traffic shopping areas and are either freestanding or in a strip center. We also have a small number of urban stores located in
high-density, mixed-use projects. In selecting store locations, we use an internally developed model to analyze potential markets based on various criteria such as education levels, population density and income levels. Approximately 86% of our
existing U.S. stores are located in the top 50 statistical metropolitan areas. We primarily seek to open large format stores, which range in size between 40,000 to 60,000 square feet and are located on premier real estate sites, often in urban,
high-population locales. After we have selected a target site, our development group does a comprehensive site study and sales projection. Each project must meet an internal EVA hurdle return, which is generally cumulative positive EVA within five
to seven years.     Based on past experience, approximately 55% of our
stores open within 12 to 24 months after the signing of a new store lease is announced. For stores signed, announced and opened over the past 10 years, the median length of time was 17 months. The required cash investment for new stores varies
depending on the size of the new store, geographic location, degree of work performed by the landlord and complexity of site development issues.    Purchasing and Distribution    Our buyers purchase products for retail sale from local, regional and international wholesale suppliers and vendors. Over the last few years, we have shifted the majority
of our purchasing operations from the store to the regional and national level. Increased purchasing on a regional and national level enables us to negotiate better volume discounts with major vendors and distributors, and allows regional and store
buyers to focus on local products and the unique product mix necessary to keep a neighborhood market feel in our stores. We own two produce procurement centers which facilitate the procurement and distribution of the majority of the produce we sell.
In addition, we operate three seafood processing and distribution facilities and a specialty coffee roaster and distributor. We also have six regional commissaries and 12 bakehouse facilities, all of which distribute products to our stores. Other
products are typically procured through a combination of specialty wholesalers and direct distributors. We operate 10 regional distribution centers, distributing a full range of products to our stores across the U.S., Canada and United Kingdom.
   United Natural Foods is our single largest supplier, accounting for
approximately 20% of our total purchases in fiscal year 2004.    Marketing
   We spend less on advertising and marketing than conventional supermarkets
– approximately 0.5% of our total sales in fiscal year 2004, instead relying primarily on word-of-mouth recommendations from our customers. We allocate our marketing budget among region-wide programs, our individual stores’ marketing
efforts, and a national brand awareness initiative focusing primarily on national and major market public relations and consumer research. Our stores spend most of their marketing budgets on in-store marketing-related activities, including signage
and in-store events such as taste fairs, classes, tours and product samplings. To create goodwill and develop a high profile within the community, each store also has a separate budget for making contributions to a variety of philanthropic and
community activities. We presently contribute at least 5% of our after-tax profits in the form of cash or products to not-for-profit organizations.    Customer Service    One of our core values as a company is to satisfy and delight our customers. We want to meet or exceed their expectations on every shopping trip. We believe that by doing so we turn customers into advocates for our
business, who do more than shop with us; they talk about Whole Foods Market to their friends and others. We want to serve our customers competently, efficiently, and knowledgeably. We believe that we generate greater appreciation and loyalty from
our customers by educating them about natural and organic foods, health, nutrition and the environment through our in-store “Take Action” centers as well as on our corporate Web site at www.wholefoodsmarket.com, which features hundreds of
recipes and a library of information about environmental, legislative, food safety and product quality issues.    Team Members    As of September 26, 2004,
we had approximately 32,100 team members, including 27,600 full-time, 2,900 part-time and 1,600 temporary team members. We are proud that approximately 90% of our permanent team members are full-time team members, which we believe is very high for
the food retailing industry. All of our full-time and part-time team members are eligible to receive stock options. One of our core values is team member happiness and excellence, and for the past seven years, our team members have helped Whole
Foods Market be selected as one of Fortune magazine’s “100 Best Companies to Work for in America.” In scoring companies, Fortune places the greatest weight (two-thirds of the total) on responses to a random survey of employees, with
the remainder being Fortune’s evaluation of each company’s benefits and practices. We are the only national food retailer to make the list, and we are one of only 24 companies to make the list every year since its   
10 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
inception. In fiscal year 2003, we conducted our first-ever, Company-wide benefits vote, which gave our team members an
opportunity to take an active role in choosing their benefits by voting on the benefits package they want in place for the next three years. Close to 80% of all eligible full-time and part-time team members participated in the vote.    Unions may from time to time attempt to organize our team members or portions of our team
member base at certain stores or non-retail facilities. In addition, our new and existing stores have been subjected to informational picketing and negative publicity campaigns from time to time by members of various local trade unions. A vote to
appoint the United Food and Commercial Workers (“UFCW”) as legal representative of our Madison, WI store was certified on September 7, 2002; however, after engaging in collective bargaining negotiations through September 2003, team members
at the store presented a petition to us requesting that the UFCW no longer be considered their official bargaining representative. On November 12, 2003, we withdrew recognition from the union. The NLRB rejected the UFCW’s challenge, and we
believe this matter is behind us. We have moved forward with a renewed sense of cooperation and shared vision.    Economic Value Added    We use Economic
Value Added (“EVA”) to evaluate our business decisions and as a basis for determining incentive compensation. In its simplest definition, EVA is equivalent to net operating profits after taxes minus a charge for the cost of capital
necessary to generate those profits. We believe that one of our core strengths is our decentralized culture, where decisions are made at the store level, close to the customer. We believe this is one of our strongest competitive advantages, and that
EVA is the best financial framework that team members can use to help make decisions that create sustainable shareholder value.    We use EVA extensively for capital investment decisions, including evaluating new store real estate decisions and store remodeling proposals. We turn down projects that
we believe will not add long-term value to the Company. The EVA decision-making model also enhances operating decisions in stores. Our emphasis is on EVA improvement, as we want to challenge our teams to continue to innovate and grow EVA in new
ways. We believe that opportunities always exist to increase sales and margins, to lower operating expenses and to make investments that add value in ways that benefit all of our stakeholders. We believe that focusing on EVA improvement encourages
continuous improvement of our business.    Over 500 leaders throughout the
Company are on EVA-based incentive compensation plans, of which the primary measure is EVA improvement. EVA-based plans cover our senior executive leadership, regional leadership and the store leadership team in all stores. Incentive compensation
for each of these groups is determined based on relevant EVA measures at different levels, including the total company level, the regional level, the store or facility level, and the team level. We believe using EVA in a multi-dimensional approach
best measures the results of decisions made at different levels of the Company. We expect to continue to expand the use of EVA as a significant component of our compensation structure throughout the Company in the coming years.    Information about our EVA financial results is not presented in consideration of rules
adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) regarding non-GAAP financial measures. Additional information about our EVA financial results is available on our corporate Web site at www.wholefoodsmarket.com and is not
incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K.    Competition 
  Food retailing is a large, intensely competitive industry. Our competition varies from
region to region and includes local, regional and national conventional and specialty supermarkets, smaller specialty stores, and restaurants, each of which competes with us on the basis of price, quality or a combination of both. We believe our
focus on quality and service differentiates us in this segmented marketplace.    Natural and organic foods are one of the fastest growing segments of food retailing today. Most supermarkets offer at least a limited selection of these products, while some have chosen to expand their selection more aggressively. We
believe it works to our benefit for conventional supermarkets to offer natural and organic products for two reasons: first, it helps fulfill our company mission of improving the health, well-being and healing of both people and the planet, and
second, it helps create new customers for us by creating a gateway experience. As more people are exposed to the benefits of natural and organic products, they are more likely to become Whole Foods Market customers because we are the category leader
for natural and organic products, offering what we believe is the largest selection and most informed customer service at competitive prices.   
11 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Government and Public Affairs    Our stores are subject to various federal, state and local laws, regulations and administrative practices affecting our business. We must
comply with provisions regulating health and sanitation standards, food labeling, equal employment, minimum wages and licensing for the sale of food and, in some stores, alcoholic beverages.    The manufacturing, processing, formulating, packaging, labeling and advertising of products
are subject to regulation by various federal agencies including the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), the Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), the Consumer Product Safety Commission (“CPSC”), the United States
Department of Agriculture (“USDA”) and the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”). The composition and labeling of nutritional supplements are most actively regulated by the FDA under the provisions of the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act (“FFDC Act”). The FFDC Act has been revised in recent years with respect to dietary supplements by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act and by the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act. We believe we are in material
compliance with product labeling requirements.    Margaret Wittenberg, our Vice
President of Marketing and Public Affairs, has served on numerous government boards and industry committees to create and strengthen the USDA’s Organic Rule and to counsel the USDA and the EPA on pesticide tolerance levels, the use and labeling
of GMOs in the food chain, and preserving marine fisheries.    Trademarks
   Trademarks owned by the Company or its subsidiaries include, but are not
limited to: “Whole Foods Market,” “365 Everyday Value,” “365 Organic Everyday Value,” “Allegro Coffee Company,” “Bread & Circus,” “Fresh Fields,” “Merchant of Vino,”
“Mrs. Gooch’s,” “Wellspring,” “Harry’s Farmers Market,” “Nature’s Heartland,” “AFA,” “Animal Compassionate,” “Whole Kids Organic,” “Whole Kitchen,”
“Whole Treat,” “Whole Catch,” Whole Fields,” “Whole Baby” and “Whole Foods, Whole People, Whole Planet.” The Company or its subsidiaries also holds registrations or applications, and maintains common law
trademark rights for stylized logos and brand names for products created by Allegro Coffee Company and many of its private label products.    wholefoodsmarket.com    Our corporate Web site at www.wholefoodsmarket.com provides detailed information about our company and history, product offerings, store locations, hundreds of recipes and a library of information about environmental,
legislative, health, food safety and product quality issues. and financial information, including a database of press releases. Access to the Company’s SEC filings, including annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current
reports on Form 8-K, Section 16 filings, and all amendments to those reports is also available through our Web site free of charge, as soon as reasonably practicable after these reports are filed electronically with the SEC. As with our stores, the
focus of our Web site is customer service. We believe our Web site provides us with an opportunity to further our relationships with customers, suppliers and investors, to educate them on a variety of issues, and to improve our service levels.
   We have included our Web site address only as an inactive textual reference.
The information contained on our Web site is not incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K.    Additional Factors that May Affect Future Results    We wish to caution you that there are risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to be materially different from those indicated by forward-looking statements that we make from time to time in filings
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, news releases, reports, proxy statements, registration statements and other written communications, as well as oral forward-looking statements made from time to time by representatives of the Company.
These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the risks described below. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently deem immaterial also may impair our business operations. The cautionary
statements below discuss important factors that could cause our business, financial condition, operating results and cash flows to be materially adversely affected. The Company does not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements.
   Our Growth Is Partially Dependent on New Store Openings and Acquisitions
   Our strategy is to expand through a combination of new store openings
and, to a lesser extent, acquisitions of existing stores. Successful implementation of this strategy is contingent on numerous conditions, some of which are described below, and there can be no assurance that our expansion strategy can be
successfully executed.    Our continued growth depends to a significant degree on
our ability to open or acquire new stores in existing and new markets and to operate these stores successfully. Our expansion strategy is dependent on finding suitable locations, and we face   
12 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
intense competition from other retailers for such sites. We may not be able to timely open new stores or operate them
successfully. In addition, we may not be able to successfully hire and train new team members or integrate those team members into the programs and policies of the Company. We may not be able to adapt our distribution, management information and
other operating systems to adequately supply products to new stores at competitive prices so that we can operate the stores in a successful and profitable manner.    There can be no assurance that we will continue to grow through acquisitions. For the acquisitions that we do make, we may not be able to
successfully integrate those businesses into our operations and support systems, or the operations of acquired businesses may be adversely affected by the introduction of our decentralized operational approach. The integration of acquired operations
into our operations requires the dedication of management resources that may temporarily detract attention from our day-to-day business.    We May Experience Significant Fluctuations in Our Comparable Store Sales   
Our comparable store sales in the future could fluctuate or be lower than our historical average for many reasons including new and acquired stores entering into the
comparable store base, the opening of new stores that cannibalize store sales in existing markets, increased competition, price changes in response to competitive factors, possible supply shortages, and cycling against above-average sales results in
the prior year. Results of operations may be materially impacted by fluctuations in our comparable store sales as it becomes more difficult to leverage expenses at a lower level of sales.    We May Experience Significant Fluctuations in Our Quarterly Operating Results    Our quarterly operating results could fluctuate for many reasons, including losses from new
stores, variations in the mix of product sales, price changes in response to competitive factors, increases in store operating costs, possible supply shortages, extreme weather-related disruptions, and potential uninsured casualty losses or other
losses. In addition, our quarterly operating results may fluctuate significantly as the result of the timing of new store openings, the timing of acquisitions, the range of operating results generated from newly opened stores and changes in
estimates associated with the disposal of discontinued operations. Quarter-to-quarter comparisons of results of operations have been and may be materially impacted by the timing of new store openings.    Increased Competition May Have an Adverse Effect on Profitability    Our competitors currently include other natural foods supermarkets, conventional and
specialty supermarkets, other natural foods stores, small specialty stores and restaurants. These businesses compete with us in one or more product categories. In addition, some traditional and specialty supermarkets are expanding more aggressively
in marketing a range of natural foods, thereby competing directly with us for products, customers and locations. Some of these potential competitors may have been in business longer or may have greater financial or marketing resources than we do and
may be able to devote greater resources to sourcing, promoting and selling their products. Increased competition may have an adverse effect on profitability as the result of lower sales, lower gross profits and/or greater operating costs such as
marketing.    Our Business May be Sensitive to Economic Conditions that Impact
Consumer Spending    Our results of operations may be sensitive to changes
in overall economic conditions that impact consumer spending, including discretionary spending. Future economic conditions affecting disposable consumer income such as employment levels, business conditions, interest rates and tax rates could reduce
consumer spending or cause consumers to shift their spending to our competitors. A general reduction in the level of discretionary spending or shifts in consumer discretionary spending to our competitors could adversely affect our growth and
profitability.    Legal Proceedings Could Materially Impact Our Results
   From time to time, we are party to legal proceedings including matters
involving personnel and employment issues, personal injury, intellectual property and other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. Although not currently anticipated by management, our results could be materially impacted by the
decisions and expenses related to pending or future proceedings.    We May Be
Subject to Product Liability Claims if People Are Harmed By the Products We Sell    There is increasing governmental scrutiny of and public awareness regarding food safety. We believe that many customers choose to shop our stores because of their interest in health, nutrition and food safety. We believe that our customers
hold us to a higher food safety standard than conventional supermarkets. The real or perceived sale of contaminated food products by us could result in product liability claims, the settlement or outcome of which might have a material adverse effect
on our sales and operations.   
13 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
The Loss of Key Management Could Negatively Affect Our Business    We are dependent upon a number of key management and other team members. If we were to lose
the services of a significant number of key team members within a short period of time, this could have a material adverse effect on our operations. We do not maintain key person insurance on any team member. Our continued success is also dependent
upon our ability to attract and retain qualified team members to meet our future growth needs. We face intense competition for qualified team members, many of whom are subject to offers from competing employers. We may not be able to attract and
retain necessary team members to operate our business.    Union Attempts to
Organize Our Team Members and Informational Picketing May Disrupt Our Business    Unions have from time to time attempted to organize our team members or portions of our team member base at certain stores and non-retail facilities. Responding to such organization attempts requires substantial management and team member
time and can be disruptive to operations. In addition, our new and existing stores have from time to time been subjected to informational picketing and negative publicity campaigns by members of various local trade unions. Any of these union
activities may have a negative financial effect on a store, facility or the Company as a whole.    Unfavorable Changes in Government Regulation Could Harm Our Business    Our stores are subject to various federal, state and local laws, regulations and administrative practices affecting our business, and we must comply with provisions regulating health and sanitation standards, food
labeling, equal employment, minimum wages and licensing for the sale of food and, in some stores, alcoholic beverages. Our new store openings could be delayed or prevented or our existing stores could be impacted by difficulties or failures in our
ability to obtain or maintain required approvals or licenses.    The
manufacturing, processing, formulating, packaging, labeling and advertising of products are subject to regulation by various federal agencies including the FDA, FTC, CPSC, USDA and EPA. The composition and labeling of nutritional supplements are
most actively regulated by the FDA under the provisions of the FFDC Act. The FFDC Act has been revised in recent years with respect to dietary supplements by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act and by the Dietary Supplement Health and Education
Act.    The USDA’s Organic Rule, implemented into federal law on October 21,
2002, should facilitate interstate commerce and the marketing of fresh and processed food that is organically produced and should also provide an assurance to our customers that such products meet consistent, uniform standards. Compliance with this
rule might pose a significant burden on some of our suppliers, which may cause a disruption in some of our product offerings.    We cannot predict the nature of future laws, regulations, interpretations or applications, or determine what effect either additional government regulations or
administrative orders, when and if promulgated, or disparate federal, state and local regulatory schemes would have on our business in the future. They could, however, require the reformulation of certain products to meet new standards, the recall
or discontinuance of certain products not able to be reformulated, additional record keeping, expanded documentation of the properties of certain products, expanded or different labeling and/or scientific substantiation. Any or all of such
requirements could have an adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.    Changes in the Availability of Quality Natural and Organic Products Could Impact Our Business    There is no assurance that quality natural and organic products will be available to meet our future needs. If conventional supermarkets increase their natural and
organic product offerings or if new laws require the reformulation of certain products to meet tougher standards, the supply of these products may be constrained. Any significant disruption in the supply of quality natural and organic products could
have a material impact on our overall sales and cost of goods.    Perishable
Foods Product Losses Could Materially Impact Our Results    We believe our
stores more heavily emphasize perishable products than conventional supermarket stores. Perishable products accounted for approximately 67% of our total retail sales in fiscal year 2004. The Company’s emphasis on perishable products may result
in significant product inventory losses in the event of extended power outages, natural disasters or other catastrophic occurrences.    Our Stock Price Is Volatile    The market price of our common stock could be subject to significant fluctuation in response to various market factors and events. These market factors and events include
variations in our earnings results, changes in earnings estimates by securities analysts, publicity regarding us, our competitors, the natural products industry generally, new statutes or regulations or changes in the interpretation of existing
statutes or regulations affecting the natural products industry specifically, sales of substantial amounts of common stock in the public market or the perception that such sales could occur and other factors.   
14 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
In addition, the stock market in recent years has experienced broad price and volume fluctuations that often have been
unrelated to the operating performance of particular companies. These market fluctuations also may adversely affect the market price of our common stock. Volatility in the price of our common stock, changes in prevailing interest rates and changes
in perception of our creditworthiness may adversely affect the price of our convertible subordinated debentures.    Changes in the Amount of Stock Option Exercises Could Impact Our Cash Flows    Our cash flows from the exercise of team member stock options may be adversely affected in the future by fluctuations in the market price of
our common stock, changes in income tax law, and changes in the number of stock options we grant.    Capital Needed for Expansion May Not Be Available    The acquisition of existing stores, the opening of new stores, and the development of new production and distribution facilities require significant amounts of capital. In the past, our growth has been funded
primarily through proceeds from public offerings, bank debt, private placements of debt and internally generated cash flow. These and other sources of capital may not be available to us in the future. In addition, restrictive covenants that may be
imposed by our lenders may restrict our ability to fund our growth.    Information System Upgrades or Integrations May Disrupt Our Operations or Financial Reporting    We continually evaluate and upgrade our management information systems. We have completed a number of acquisitions in recent years, and the information systems at some of the acquired operations have not been fully
integrated with our information systems. Although we do not anticipate any disruption in our operations or financial reporting as a result of system upgrades or system integrations, there can be no assurance that such disruption will not occur or
that the desired benefits from the system upgrades will be realized.    We May
Not Be Able to Adequately Protect Our Intellectual Property Rights    We
rely on a combination of trademark, trade secret and copyright law and internal procedures and nondisclosure agreements to protect our intellectual property. There can be no assurance that our intellectual property rights can be successfully
asserted in the future or will not be invalidated, circumvented or challenged. In addition, the laws of certain foreign countries in which our products may be produced or sold do not protect our intellectual property rights to the same extent as the
laws of the United States. Failure to protect our proprietary information could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.    Self-Insurance Plan Claims Could Materially Impact Our Results    The Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for the potential liabilities for workers’
compensation, general liability, property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part,
by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial assumptions. Although not currently anticipated by management, our results could be materially impacted by claims and other expenses related to
such plans if future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical trends.    Effective Tax Rate Changes and Results of Examinations by Taxing Authorities Could Materially Impact Our Results    Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in states or countries where we have lower statutory rates and higher
than anticipated in states or countries where we have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities, or by changes in tax laws or interpretations thereof. In addition, we are subject to periodic
audits and examinations by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other state and local taxing authorities. Although not currently anticipated by management, our results could be materially impacted by the determinations and expenses
related to these and other proceedings by the IRS and other state and local taxing authorities.   
15 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Executive Officers and Regional Presidents    The following table sets forth the name, age and position of each of the persons who was serving as an executive officer or regional
president of the Company as of November 30, 2004:   








 Name
 
 Age
 
 Position

John P. Mackey
 
51
 
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer

A.C. Gallo
 
51
 
Co-President and Chief Operating Officer

Walter Robb
 
51
 
Co-President and Chief Operating Officer

Glenda Flanagan
 
51
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer

James P. Sud
 
52
 
Executive Vice President of Growth and Business Development

Lee Valkenaar
 
48
 
Executive Vice President of Global Support

Scott Allshouse
 
42
 
President, South Region

Michael Besancon
 
58
 
President, Southern Pacific Region

Patrick Bradley
 
44
 
President, Midwest Region

Mark Dixon
 
42
 
President, Southwest Region

Anthony Gilmore
 
44
 
President, Northern California Region

David Lannon
 
38
 
President, North Atlantic Region

Ron Megahan
 
34
 
President, Pacific Northwest Region

Kenneth Meyer
 
36
 
President, Mid-Atlantic Region

Juan Nunez
 
46
 
President, Florida Region

William Paradise
 
44
 
President, Rocky Mountain Region
   John P. Mackey, co-founder of the
Company, has served as Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer since 1980. Mr. Mackey also served as President of the Company from July 2001 through September 2004.    A.C. Gallo has served as Co-President of the Company since September 2004 and as Chief Operating Officer since December 2003. Mr. Gallo has
held various positions with the Company and with Bread & Circus, Inc., which was acquired by the Company in October 1992, including Vice President and President of the North Atlantic Region, and Executive Vice President of Operations.
   Walter Robb has served as Co-President of the Company since September 2004 and
as Chief Operating Officer since December 2003. Since joining the Company in 1991, Mr. Robb has also served as Store Team Leader, President of the Northern Pacific Region, and Executive Vice President of Operations.    Glenda Flanagan has served as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of the
Company since December 1988.    James P. Sud has served as Executive Vice
President of Growth and Business Development since February 2001. Mr. Sud joined the Company in May 1997 and served as Vice President and Chief Operating Officer until February 2001. Mr. Sud served as a director of the Company from 1980 to 1997.
   Lee Valkenaar has served as Executive Vice President of Global Support since
September 2004. Mr. Valkenaar has held various positions with the Company since 1987, including Store Team Leader, Vice President and President of the Southwest Region, and President of the Mid-Atlantic Region.    Scott Allshouse has served as President of the South Region since November 2004. Mr.
Allshouse has held various positions with the Company since 2000, including Store Team Leader and Vice President of the South Region. For 27 years prior to joining the Company, Mr. Allshouse held various positions at different retail grocers,
serving as a Store Director for the last 17 years.    Michael Besancon has served
as President of the Southern Pacific Region since February 2001. Mr. Besancon has held various positions with the Company since 1995, including Purchasing Director, Vice President of the Southern Pacific Region and President of the Mid-Atlantic
Region.    Patrick Bradley has served as President of the Midwest Region since
November 2004. Mr. Bradley has held various positions with the Company and with Mrs. Gooch’s Natural Food Markets, Inc., which was acquired by the Company in September 1993, including Store Team Leader and Vice President of the Southern Pacific
Region.    Mark Dixon has served as President of the Southwest Region since
October 2004. Mr. Dixon has held various positions with the Company since 1984, including Store Team Leader and Vice President of the Southwest Region.   
16 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Anthony Gilmore has served as President of the Northern California region since September 2004. Mr. Gilmore has held
various positions with the Company since 1996, including Store Team Leader, Vice President and President of the Southwest Region, and President of the Midwest Region.    David Lannon has served as President of the North Atlantic Region since March 2001. Mr. Lannon has held various positions with the Company
and with Bread & Circus, Inc., which was acquired by the Company in October 1992, including Store Team Leader, Director of Store Operations and Vice President of the North Atlantic Region.    Ron Megahan has served as President of the Pacific Northwest Region since September 2004. Mr.
Megahan has held various positions with the Company since 1989, including Store Team Leader and President of the Northern Pacific Region.    Kenneth Meyer has served as President of the Mid-Atlantic Region since October 2004. Mr. Meyer has held various positions with the Company since 1996, including Store
Team Leader, Vice President of the Southwest Region, and President of the South Region.    Juan Nunez has served as President of the Florida Region since September 1998. Mr. Nunez has held various positions with the Company and with Mrs. Gooch’s Natural Food Markets, Inc., which was acquired by the Company in September 1993,
including Store Team Leader, Director of Store Operations and Vice President of the Southwest Region.    William Paradise has served as President of the Rocky Mountain Region since September 2004. Mr. Paradise has held various positions with the Company since 1990, including Store Team Leader, Vice President of the
Northern Pacific Region, and Vice President and President of the Southwest Region.    
Item 2. Properties.    At September 26, 2004, we
operated 163 stores in 28 U.S. states, the District of Columbia, Canada and the United Kingdom. We own a total of six stores located in New Orleans, Berkeley and Atlanta. We also own certain non-retail facilities in Atlanta and a building in Austin,
Texas which houses one of our stores, the corporate headquarters and a bookstore. The underlying property in Austin is leased from a third party under a ground lease which has a remaining base term of approximately nine years plus 10 options to
renew for five years each. All other stores, distribution centers, bakehouses and administrative facilities are leased, with expiration dates ranging from one to 35 years. We have options to renew most of our leases in five-year increments with
renewal periods ranging from five to 50 years. The following table shows the number of our stores by state, the District of Columbia, Canada and the United Kingdom as of September 26, 2004:   














 Location
 
 Number of Stores
 
 Location
 
 Number of Stores
 
 Location
 
 Number of Stores

 Arizona
 
  2
 
Louisiana
 
  2
 
North Carolina
 
  5

 California
 
  38
 
Maryland
 
  7
 
Oregon
 
  1

 Colorado
 
  5
 
Massachusetts
 
  13
 
Pennsylvania
 
  7

 Canada
 
  2
 
Michigan
 
  4
 
Rhode Island
 
  2

 Connecticut
 
  1
 
Minnesota
 
  2
 
South Carolina
 
  1

 District of Columbia
 
  3
 
Missouri
 
  1
 
Texas
 
  13

 Florida
 
  6
 
Nevada
 
  1
 
United Kingdom
 
  7

 Georgia
 
  6
 
New Jersey
 
  7
 
Virginia
 
  7

 Illinois
 
  9
 
New Mexico
 
  2
 
Washington
 
  2

 Kansas
 
  1
 
New York
 
  4
 
Wisconsin
 
  1

Kentucky
 
  1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.    From time to time, the
Company is involved in lawsuits that we consider to be in the normal course of business which have not resulted in any material losses to date.    
Item 4. Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders.    No matter was submitted to a vote of Whole Foods Market’s shareholders, through the solicitation of proxies or otherwise, during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2004.   
17 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

PART II    
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.    Whole Foods Market’s common stock is traded on the NASDAQ National Market under the symbol WFMI. The following sets forth the intra-day quarterly high and low sale
prices of the Company’s common stock, as well as declared dividends per share, for the last two fiscal years.   













 
  
High
  
Low
  
DividendsDeclared

 Fiscal Year 2004
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 September 29, 2003 to January 18, 2004
  
$
71.83
  
$
53.47
  
$
0.15

 January 19, 2003 to April 11, 2004
  
 
79.24
  
 
66.42
  
 
0.15

 April 12, 2004 to July 4, 2004
  
 
96.74
  
 
73.50
  
 
0.15

 July 5, 2004 to September 26, 2004
  
 
96.00
  
 
73.21
  
 
0.15






 Fiscal Year 2003
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 September 30, 2002 to January 19, 2003
  
$
54.59
  
$
40.51
  
$
—  

 January 20, 2003 to April 13, 2003
  
 
58.18
  
 
44.77
  
 
—  

 April 14, 2003 to July 6, 2003
  
 
62.24
  
 
45.78
  
 
—  

 July 7, 2003 to September 28, 2003
  
 
56.24
  
 
45.90
  
 
—  

 
  


  


  


   As of November 30, 2004, there were
1,703 holders of record of Whole Foods Market’s common stock and the closing stock price was $90.77.    On November 12, 2003, the Company announced its first quarterly cash dividend. The first dividend of $0.15 per share, in the amount of $9.1 million, was paid on January 16, 2004 to shareholders of record as of January
6, 2004. The second divided of $0.15 per share, in the amount of $9.2 million, was paid on April 19, 2004 to shareholders of record as of April 9, 2004. The third dividend of $0.15 per share, in the amount of $9.4 million, was paid on July 19, 2004
to shareholders of record as of July 9, 2004, and the fourth dividend of $0.15 per share, in the amount of $9.4 million, was paid on October 18, 2004 to shareholders of record as of October 8, 2004. On November 10, 2004, the Company announced a 27%
increase in its quarterly cash dividend to $0.19 per share. The first $0.19 per share dividend is payable on January 17, 2005 to shareholders of record as of January 7, 2005. The Company will pay future dividends at the discretion of the Board of
Directors. The continuation of these payments, the amount of such dividends, and the form in which the dividends are paid (cash or stock) depend on many factors, including the results of operations and the financial condition of the Company. Subject
to these qualifications, the Company currently expects to pay dividends on a quarterly basis.    On January 31, 2004, the Company issued 238,735 shares of Company common stock, worth approximately $16 million, in a transaction that was exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act, to persons
reasonably believed to be “accredited investors” (as defined in Regulation D) and paid additional cash to acquire Fresh & Wild Holdings Limited. The Company later filed a Registration Statement under the Securities Act to permit the
resale of the Company shares.    The following table summarizes information about
our Company’s equity compensation plans by type as of September 26, 2004 (in thousands):   











 Plan Category
  
OptionsOutstanding
  
WeightedAverageExercise Price
  
OptionsAvailablefor FutureIssuance

 Approved by security holders
  
8,070
  
$
51.38
  
5,567

 Not approved by security holders
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
—  

 
  

  


  


 Total
  
8,070
  
$
51.38
  
5,567

 
  

  


  

   No repurchases of the Company’s
equity securities were made during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2004.     
18 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Item 6. Selected Financial Data.    Whole Foods
Market, Inc.  Summary Financial Information  (In thousands, except per share and operating data)    The following selected financial data are derived from the Company’s consolidated financial statements and have been restated to reflect adjustments to the original Form 10-K that are further discussed in “Explanatory Note”
in the forepart of this Form 10-K/A and in Note 3 to Consolidated Financial Statements, “Restatement of Financial Statements” in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K/A.   
























 
  
Sept. 26,2004
 
 
Sept. 28,2003
 
 
Sept. 29,2002
 
 
Sept. 30,2001
 
 
Sept. 24,2000
 

 Consolidated Statements of Operations Data (1)
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Sales
  
$
3,864,950
 
 
$
3,148,593
 
 
$
2,690,475
 
 
$
2,272,231
 
 
$
1,838,630
 

 Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs
  
 
2,523,816
 
 
 
2,070,334
 
 
 
1,758,281
 
 
 
1,482,828
 
 
 
1,205,248
 

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Gross profit
  
 
1,341,134
 
 
 
1,078,259
 
 
 
932,194
 
 
 
789,403
 
 
 
633,382
 

 Direct store expenses
  
 
986,040
 
 
 
794,422
 
 
 
677,404
 
 
 
575,957
 
 
 
460,863
 

 General and administrative expenses
  
 
119,800
 
 
 
100,693
 
 
 
95,871
 
 
 
82,440
 
 
 
60,054
 

 Goodwill amortization
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
3,129
 
 
 
2,246
 

 Pre-opening and relocation costs
  
 
18,648
 
 
 
15,765
 
 
 
17,934
 
 
 
13,993
 
 
 
15,576
 

 Store closure and asset disposal costs
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
9,425
 
 
 
—  
 

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Operating income
  
 
216,646
 
 
 
167,379
 
 
 
140,985
 
 
 
104,459
 
 
 
94,643
 

 Other income (expense):
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Interest expense
  
 
(7,249
)
 
 
(8,114
)
 
 
(10,384
)
 
 
(17,891
)
 
 
(15,093
)

 Investment and other income (loss)
  
 
6,456
 
 
 
5,593
 
 
 
2,056
 
 
 
1,628
 
 
 
(8,015
)

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Income from continuing operations before income taxes and equity in losses of unconsolidated affiliates
  
 
215,853
 
 
 
164,858
 
 
 
132,657
 
 
 
88,196
 
 
 
71,535
 

 Provision for income taxes
  
 
86,341
 
 
 
65,943
 
 
 
53,063
 
 
 
35,278
 
 
 
32,194
 

 Equity in losses of unconsolidated affiliates
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
5,626
 
 
 
14,074
 

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Income from continuing operations before cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
  
 
129,512
 
 
 
98,915
 
 
 
79,594
 
 
 
47,292
 
 
 
25,267
 

 Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
16,233
 
 
 
(33,383
)

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Income (loss) before cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
  
 
129,512
 
 
 
98,915
 
 
 
79,594
 
 
 
63,525
 
 
 
(8,116
)

 Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle, net of income taxes
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
(375
)

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Net income (loss)
  
$
129,512
 
 
$
98,915
 
 
$
79,594
 
 
$
63,525
 
 
$
(8,491
)

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Basic earnings (loss) per share:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Income from continuing operations before cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
  
$
2.11
 
 
$
1.68
 
 
$
1.41
 
 
$
0.88
 
 
$
0.48
 

 Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
0.30
 
 
 
(0.63
)

 Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle, net of income taxes
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
(0.01
)

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Net income (loss)
  
$
2.11
 
 
$
1.68
 
 
$
1.41
 
 
$
1.18
 
 
$
(0.16
)

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Weighted average shares outstanding
  
 
61,324
 
 
 
59,035
 
 
 
56,385
 
 
 
53,664
 
 
 
52,248
 

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Diluted earnings (loss) per share:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Income from continuing operations before cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
  
$
1.98
 
 
$
1.58
 
 
$
1.32
 
 
$
0.84
 
 
$
0.46
 

 Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
0.29
 
 
 
(0.61
)

 Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle, net of income taxes
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
(0.01
)

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Net income (loss)
  
$
1.98
 
 
$
1.58
 
 
$
1.32
 
 
$
1.13
 
 
$
(0.16
)

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted basis
  
 
67,727
 
 
 
65,330
 
 
 
63,340
 
 
 
56,185
 
 
 
54,370
 

 
  



 



 



 



 




 Dividends per share
  
$
0.60
 
 
$
—  
 
 
$
—  
 
 
$
—  
 
 
$
—  
 

 
  



 



 



 



 



   (continued)
    
19 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Summary Financial Information (continued)  (In thousands, except per share and operating data) 
 
























 
  
Sept. 26,2004
 
 
Sept. 28,2003
 
 
Sept. 29,2002
 
 
Sept. 30,2001
 
 
Sept. 24,2000
 

 Consolidated Balance Sheets Data
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Net working capital
  
$
151,147
 
 
$
121,574
 
 
$
(4,157
)
 
$
(10,896
)
 
$
(11,929
)

 Total assets
  
 
1,521,006
 
 
 
1,213,568
 
 
 
959,937
 
 
 
842,976
 
 
 
771,039
 

 Long-term debt (including current maturities)
  
 
170,743
 
 
 
168,715
 
 
 
167,741
 
 
 
256,649
 
 
 
305,954
 

 Shareholders’ equity
  
 
949,638
 
 
 
744,976
 
 
 
562,658
 
 
 
387,826
 
 
 
289,981
 








 Operating Data
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Number of stores at end of fiscal year
  
 
163
 
 
 
145
 
 
 
135
 
 
 
126
 
 
 
117
 

 Average store size (gross square footage)
  
 
32,000
 
 
 
31,000
 
 
 
31,000
 
 
 
29,000
 
 
 
27,000
 

 Average weekly sales per store
  
$
482,000
 
 
$
424,000
 
 
$
393,000
 
 
$
353,000
 
 
$
325,000
 

 Comparable store sales increase (2)
  
 
14.9
%
 
 
8.6
%
 
 
10.0
%
 
 
9.2
%
 
 
8.6
%

 Identical store sales increase (2)
  
 
14.5
%
 
 
8.1
%
 
 
8.7
%
 
 
8.0
%
 
 
7.0
%

 
  



 



 



 



 






(1)
Fiscal years 2004, 2003, 2002 and 2000 were 52-week years and fiscal year 2001 was a 53-week year. 


(2)
Sales of a store are deemed to be “comparable” commencing in the fifty-third full week after the store was opened or acquired. Identical store sales excludes sales for
remodels with expansions of square footage greater than 20% and relocations.     
20 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.    General    Whole Foods Market, Inc. owns and operates the largest chain of natural and organic foods supermarkets. Our Company mission is to promote vitality and well-being for all individuals by supplying the highest quality,
most wholesome foods available. Through our growth, we have had a large and positive impact on the natural and organic foods movement throughout the United States, helping lead the industry to nationwide acceptance. We opened our first store in
Texas in 1980 and, as of September 26, 2004, have expanded our operations both by opening new stores and acquiring existing stores from third parties to 163 stores: 154 stores in 28 U.S. states and the District of Columbia; two stores in Canada; and
seven stores in the United Kingdom. We operate in one reportable segment, natural and organic foods supermarkets.    Our results of operations have been and may continue to be materially affected by the timing and number of new store openings. New stores generally become profitable
during their first year of operation, although some new stores may incur operating losses for the first one to three years of operations. Our results of operations are reported on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the last Sunday in September.
Fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002 were 52-week years.    Restatement of
Financial Statements    The Company completed a review of its historical
lease accounting methods to determine whether these methods were in accordance with the views expressed by the Office of the Chief Accountant of the SEC on February 7, 2005 in a letter to the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and
other recent interpretations regarding certain operating lease accounting issues and their application under GAAP. As a result of its review, the Company determined that its historical methods of accounting for rent holidays and tenant improvement
allowances, and of determining lives used in the calculation of depreciation of leasehold improvements and straight-line rent determination for certain leased properties, were not in accordance with GAAP. The Company has restated its consolidated
financial statements in this Report for each of the fiscal years ended September 26, 2004, September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002 to correct for these misstatements.    The Company historically had recognized rent holiday periods and scheduled rent increases on a straight-line basis over the lease term
beginning with the commencement date of the lease which is typically the store opening date. The Company has determined that the lease term should commence on the date the Company takes possession of the leased space, which is generally six months
prior to a store’s opening date. Additionally, the Company has determined that rent expense should be recorded on a straight-line basis over lease periods that are consistent with or greater than the number of periods over which depreciation of
leasehold improvements is recorded. Historically, the life used for rent expense purposes in some instances was shorter than the life used for depreciation purposes. Excluding tax impacts, the Company has recorded adjustments to “Other accrued
expenses,” “Deferred rent liabilities,” “Property and equipment” and “Retained earnings” on the consolidated balance sheets and to “Direct store expenses,” “Cost of goods sold and occupancy
costs” and “Pre-opening and relocation costs” on the consolidated statements of operations to correct historical accounting methods.    The Company historically accounted for tenant improvement allowances as reductions to the related leasehold improvement assets on the consolidated balance sheets and as
capital expenditures in investing activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows. Management determined these allowances should be recorded as deferred rent liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and as a component of operating
activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows. Additionally, this change results in a reclassification of the deferred rent amortization from “Direct store expenses” to “Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs” on the
consolidated statements of operations.    The cumulative effect of these
accounting changes is a reduction to retained earnings of $21.5 million as of the beginning of fiscal year 2002 and incremental decreases to retained earnings of $4.9 million, $4.8 million and $7.6 million for the fiscal years 2002, 2003 and 2004,
respectively. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for summaries of the effects of these accounting corrections on the consolidated balance sheets as of September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, and the related consolidated
statements of operations, shareholders’ equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the three fiscal years in the period ended September 26, 2004. The accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis incorporates the
effects of these corrections.    Executive Summary    Sales for fiscal year 2004 totaled approximately $3.9 billion, an increase of approximately
23% over the prior year, driven by 9% weighted average square footage growth and comparable store sales growth of 14.9%. We experienced sales growth across all regions, all departments and all age classes of stores. We set new weekly sales records
in 84% of our stores during fiscal year 2004, and we had sales per gross square foot of $786. Sales for fiscal year 2003 totaled approximately $3.1 billion,   
21 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
an increase of approximately 17% over the prior year, with 11% weighted average square footage growth and comparable
store sales growth of 8.6%. Sales for fiscal year 2002 totaled approximately $2.7 billion, an increase of approximately 18% over the prior year, with 16% weighted average square footage growth and comparable store sales growth of 10.0%. 
  Net income totaled $129.5 million, $98.9 million and $79.6 million for fiscal years 2004,
2003 and 2002, respectively, increasing year-over year by approximately 31%, 24% and 25%. Diluted earnings per share totaled $1.98, $1.58 and $1.32 for fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively.    Cash flows from operations totaled approximately $330.3 million, $281.0 million and $231.3
million for fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Our capital expenditures totaled approximately $266.5 million, $174.7 million and $163.5 million in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively, including approximately $156.7 million,
$90.6 million and $102.1 million, respectively, for new stores. We opened 12 stores during each of fiscal years 2004 and 2003, and opened 11 stores during fiscal year 2002, and we ended fiscal year 2004 with 163 stores.    Year over year, total assets increased 25% to $1.5 billion, total liabilities increased 22%
to $571 million, and shareholders’ equity increased 27% to $950 million. At the end of fiscal year 2004, we had $170.7 million in long-term debt and $221.5 million in total cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash.    The Company declared its first quarterly cash dividend of 15 cents per share on November 12,
2003. Four quarterly dividends of 15 cents per share each, or a total of approximately $37.1 million, were declared during fiscal year 2004. The Company announced a 27% increase in the Company’s quarterly dividend to $0.19 per share on November
10, 2004.    Results of Operations    The following table sets forth the statements of operations data of Whole Foods Market
expressed as a percentage of total sales for the fiscal years indicated:   













 
  
2004
 
 
2003
 
 
2002
 

 Sales
  
100.0
%
 
100.0
%
 
100.0
%

 Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs
  
65.3
 
 
65.8
 
 
65.4
 

 
  


 


 



 Gross profit
  
34.7
 
 
34.2
 
 
34.6
 

 Direct store expenses
  
25.5
 
 
25.2
 
 
25.2
 

 General and administrative expenses
  
3.1
 
 
3.2
 
 
3.6
 

 Pre-opening and relocation costs
  
0.5
 
 
0.5
 
 
0.7
 

 
  


 


 



 Operating income
  
5.6
 
 
5.3
 
 
5.2
 

 Other income (expense):
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Interest expense
  
(0.2
)
 
(0.3
)
 
(0.4
)

 Investment and other income
  
0.2
 
 
0.2
 
 
0.1
 

 
  


 


 



 Income before income taxes
  
5.6
 
 
5.2
 
 
4.9
 

 Provision for income taxes
  
2.2
 
 
2.1
 
 
2.0
 

 
  


 


 



 Net income
  
3.4
%
 
3.1
%
 
3.0
%

 
  


 


 


   Figures may not add due to
rounding.    Sales    Sales increased 22.8%, 17.0% and 18.4% for fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
Sales for all fiscal years shown reflect increases due to new stores opened and acquired and comparable store sales increases of approximately 14.9%, 8.6% and 10.0% in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Sales of a store are deemed to be
comparable commencing in the fifty-third full week after the store was opened or acquired. Identical store sales, which excludes sales for remodels with expansions of square footage greater than 20% and relocations, increased approximately 14.5%,
8.1%, and 8.7% in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Sales from relocations and remodels with expansions of square footage greater than 20% are excluded from identical store sales data to reduce the impact of square footage growth on
the comparison. Weighted average square footage growth from stores opened and acquired was approximately 9%, 11% and 16% for fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. We believe our comparable store sales growth and the ability to open
successful stores in diverse markets are due to the broad appeal of our stores, natural and organic products entering the mainstream consciousness, improvements in overall store execution and the growing awareness of our brand. Sales for fiscal year
2004 were positively impacted by the United Food and Commercial Workers union strike at conventional grocery store retailers in Southern California during a span of approximately 20 weeks over our first and second quarters. Nineteen of our stores
experienced an increase in sales due to the strike, 18 of which were in the comparable store base during those periods.   
22 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Gross Profit    Gross profit consists of sales less cost of goods sold and occupancy costs plus contribution from non-retail distribution and food preparation operations. Our gross
profit as a percentage of sales was 34.7%, 34.2% and 34.6% in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Our gross profit may increase or decrease slightly depending on the mix of sales from new stores or the impact of weather or a host of
other factors, including inflation. While we always have initiatives in place to drive better purchasing, we usually pass those savings on to our customers as lower prices. Our pricing strategy continues to be market driven in grocery and Whole Body
(nutritional supplements, vitamins, and body care), in which we aim to be competitively priced on the same or similar items. Our perishables may be priced at a premium to reflect the higher quality of product available in our stores. In all years,
gross profit margins were also positively affected by margin improvements as stores mature. Relative to other stores in a region, gross profit margins tend to be lower for new stores and increase as stores mature, reflecting lower shrink as volumes
increase, as well as increasing experience levels and operational efficiencies of the store teams.    Direct Store Expenses    Direct store
expenses as a percentage of sales was approximately 25.5%, 25.2% and 25.2% in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. For all years, higher direct operating expenses of new stores continue to have a partially offsetting impact on store
contribution. Direct store expense as a percentage of sales tends to be higher for new stores and decrease as stores mature, reflecting increasing operational productivity of the store teams. We continue to focus on improvements in leveraging of
labor, managing health care benefits plan costs and other direct expenses to produce incremental improvements in direct store expense as a percentage of sales.   
General and Administrative Expenses    General and administrative expenses from continuing operations as a percentage of sales were 3.1%, 3.2% and 3.6% in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Fiscal
year 2004 and 2003 general and administrative expenses decreased as a percentage of sales due to our strong sales growth and focus on leveraging general and administrative expenses at both regional and national levels. Fiscal year 2002 general and
administrative expenses reflect increased costs of infrastructure for the new South region and increases in other regions and the national office. We continue to focus on leveraging general and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales, but
do not expect significant additional leverage in fiscal year 2005 over leverage generated in fiscal year 2004.    Pre-opening and Relocation Costs    Pre-opening costs include rent expense incurred during construction of new stores and other costs related to new store openings, including costs associated with hiring and training personnel, supplies and other miscellaneous costs. Rent
expense is generally incurred for six months prior to a store’s opening date. Other pre-opening costs are incurred primarily in the 30 days prior to a new store opening. Relocation costs consist of moving costs, remaining lease payments,
accelerated depreciation costs and other costs associated with replaced facilities. Pre-opening and relocation costs were approximately $18.6 million, $15.8 million and $17.9 million in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Stores newly
opened and relocated were as follows:   










 
  
2004
  
2003
  
2002

 New stores
  
11
  
10
  
9

 Relocated stores
  
1
  
2
  
2

 
  

  

  


 Total stores opened
  
12
  
12
  
11

 
  

  

  

   Interest Expense    Interest expense consists of costs related to our convertible subordinated debentures,
senior notes and bank line of credit, net of capitalized interest associated with new store development and internally developed software. Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized, was approximately $7.2 million, $8.1 million and $10.4 million
in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. These reductions in net interest expense reflect decreased utilization of our bank line of credit and lower average interest rates over the three-year period. We had no amounts outstanding on our
bank line of credit during fiscal years 2004 or 2003.    Investment and Other
Income    Investment and other income includes investment gains and losses,
interest income, rental income and other income totaling approximately $6.5 million, $5.6 million and $2.1 million in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. During fiscal year 2004, we sold all of our investments in unrestricted and
restricted common shares of Gaiam Inc. for approximately $1.8 million, resulting in a loss of approximately $0.5 million. During fiscal year 2003, we recognized a pre-tax gain of   
23 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
approximately $3 million as a result of the distribution of our ownership share of gain from the sale of Blooming Prairie
Cooperative, and pre-tax losses totaling approximately $1.4 million to adjust the carrying value of our common stock investments in Gaiam, Inc. to quoted market value for other-than-temporary impairment due to a sustained decline in market value of
the stock below our carrying value.    Income Taxes    Our effective tax rate on income from continuing operations was approximately 40.0% for
fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002. At September 26, 2004, we had domestic net operating loss carryforwards totaling approximately $32 million which will expire in 2020. We consider it more likely than not that all domestic net operating loss
carryforwards will be utilized.    Business Combinations    On January 31, 2004, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Fresh & Wild Holdings
Limited (“Fresh & Wild”) for a total of approximately $20 million in cash and approximately $16 million in Company common stock, totaling 238,735 shares. The acquisition of Fresh & Wild, which owned and operated seven natural and
organic food stores in London and Bristol, England, provided a platform for expansion of the Whole Foods Market brand in the United Kingdom. This transaction was accounted for using the purchase method and, accordingly, the purchase price has been
allocated to tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Total costs in excess of tangible and intangible assets acquired of approximately $30.5 million have been recorded as
goodwill. The Company also agreed to an additional purchase price consideration contingent on the market price of Company common stock at January 31, 2006. If the market price of Company stock at January 31, 2006 is less than the market price at
acquisition of $68.59 per share, those sellers who received and continuously hold through January 31, 2006 Company common stock are eligible to receive an amount, in stock, cash or any combination thereof, equal to the deficit multiplied by the
number of shares continuously held. Fresh & Wild results of operations are included in our consolidated income statements for the period beginning February 1, 2004 through September 26, 2004. John Mackey, our Chief Executive Officer and Walter
Robb, our Co-President and Chief Operating Officer each owned approximately 0.2% of the outstanding stock of Fresh & Wild and received proceeds totaling approximately $54,000 and $78,000, respectively, as consideration for their ownership
interest.    On October 27, 2003, we acquired certain assets of Select Fish LLC
(“Select Fish”) in exchange for approximately $3 million in cash plus the assumption of certain liabilities. All assets acquired relate to a seafood processing and distribution facility located in Seattle, Washington. This transaction was
accounted for using the purchase method. Accordingly the purchase price has been allocated to tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values at the date of the acquisition. Total costs in excess of tangible
and intangible assets acquired of approximately $1.1 million have been recorded as goodwill. Select Fish results of operations are included in our consolidated income statements for the period beginning October 27, 2003 through September 26, 2004.
   On October 31, 2001, we completed the acquisition of certain assets of
Harry’s Farmers Markets, Inc. in exchange for approximately $36 million in cash plus the assumption of certain liabilities. The assets acquired are all assets relating to the three perishables superstores in Atlanta, Georgia, including but not
limited to real estate, the Harry’s Farmers Market trade name, distribution center and other support and office facilities. This transaction was accounted for using the purchase method. Accordingly, the purchase price has been allocated to
tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Total costs in excess of tangible and intangible assets acquired of approximately $8.7 million have been recorded as goodwill.
Results of these acquired operations are included in our consolidated statements of operations for the period beginning October 31, 2001 through September 29, 2002 and all subsequent periods.    Liquidity and Capital Resources    We generated cash flows from operating activities of approximately $330.3 million, $281.0
million and $231.3 million in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Cash flows from operating activities represented our principal source of cash and resulted primarily from our net income less non-cash expenses, income tax benefits that
resulted from the exercise of team member stock options and changes in operating working capital. We had cash and cash equivalent balances, including restricted cash, totaling approximately $221.5 million and $165.8 million at September 26, 2004 and
September 28, 2003, respectively.    On October 1, 2004, we amended our credit
facility to extend the maturity of our $100 million revolving line of credit to October 1, 2009. The credit agreement contains certain affirmative covenants including maintenance of certain financial ratios and certain negative covenants including
limitations on additional indebtedness as defined in the agreement. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, we were in compliance with the applicable debt covenants. All outstanding amounts borrowed   
24 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
under this agreement bear interest at our option of either a defined base rate or the LIBOR rate plus a premium.
Commitment fees of 0.15% of the undrawn amount are payable under this agreement. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003 no amounts were drawn under the agreement. The amounts available to the Company under the agreement were effectively
reduced to $96.5 million and $80.2 million by outstanding letters of credit totaling approximately $3.5 million and $19.8 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively.    We have outstanding zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures which had a carrying
amount of approximately $158.8 million and $151.4 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively. The debentures have an effective yield to maturity of 5 percent and a principal amount at maturity on March 2, 2018 of
approximately $308.8 million. The debentures are convertible at the option of the holder, at any time on or prior to maturity, unless previously redeemed or otherwise purchased. The debentures have a conversion rate of 10.640 shares per $1,000
principal amount at maturity, representing approximately 3,280,000 shares. The debentures may be redeemed at the option of the holder on March 2, 2008 or March 2, 2013 at the issue price plus accrued original discount totaling approximately $188
million and $241 million, respectively. No debentures were redeemed at the option of the holder on the potential redemption date of March 2, 2003. Subject to certain limitations, at our option, we may elect to pay this purchase price in cash, shares
of common stock or any combination thereof. The debentures may also be redeemed in cash at the option of the holder if there is a change in control at the issue price plus accrued original discount to the date of redemption. The Company may redeem
the debentures for cash, in whole or in part, at redemption prices equal to the issue price plus accrued original discount to the date of redemption. The debentures are subordinated in the right of payment to all existing and future senior
indebtedness.    We also have outstanding senior unsecured notes that bear
interest at 7.29% payable quarterly with a carrying amount of approximately $11.4 million and $17.1 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively. Principal on the senior notes is payable in annual installments of approximately
$5.7 million through May 16, 2006. Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $22.9 million and $46.4 million in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively. Net cash used in financing activities was approximately $29.0 million in
fiscal year 2002.    The following table shows payments due by period on
contractual obligations as of September 26, 2004 (in thousands):   
















 
  
Total
  
Less than 1Year
  
 1-5 Years
  
After 5Years

 Convertible debt
  
$
158,791
  
$
—  
  
$
158,791
  
$
—  

 Senior notes
  
 
11,429
  
 
5,714
  
 
5,715
  
 
—  

 Capital lease obligations (including interest)
  
 
582
  
 
286
  
 
296
  
 
—  

 Operating lease obligations
  
 
2,551,182
  
 
100,169
  
 
518,358
  
 
1,932,655

 
  


  


  


  


   Although the timing of any potential
redemption is uncertain, the above table assumes convertible debentures will be redeemed at the option of the holder on March 2, 2008.    The following table shows expirations per period on commercial commitments as of September 26, 2004 (in thousands):   
















 
  
Total
  
Less than 1Year
  
 1-5 Years
  
After 5Years

 Credit facility
  
$
100,000
  
$
—  
  
$
100,000
  
$
—  

 
  


  


  


  


   We periodically make other commitments
and become subject to other contractual obligations that we believe to be routine in nature and incidental to the operation of the business. Management believes that such routine commitments and contractual obligations do not have a material impact
on our business, financial condition or results of operations.    The Company
declared its first quarterly cash dividend of 15 cents per share on November 12, 2003. Four quarterly dividends totaling 60 cents per share, or a total of approximately $37.1 million, were declared during fiscal year 2004. The Company announced a
27% increase in the Company’s quarterly dividend to $0.19 per share on November 10, 2004. The Company will pay future dividends at the discretion of the Board of Directors. The continuation of these payments, the amount of such dividends, and
the form in which the dividends are paid (cash or stock) depend on many factors, including the results of operations and the financial condition of the Company. Subject to these qualifications, the Company currently expects to pay dividends on a
quarterly basis.    Our principal historical capital requirements have been the
funding of the development or acquisition of new stores and acquisition of property and equipment for existing stores. The required cash investment for new stores varies depending on   
25 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
the size of the new store, geographic location, degree of work performed by the landlord and complexity of site
development issues. As of November 10, 2004, we had signed leases for 53 stores averaging approximately 49,000 square feet in size. The following table provides information about the Company’s stores under development:   










 
  
November 10,2004
 
 
November 12,2003
 

 Stores
  
53
 
 
35
 

 Average store size (gross square feet)
  
49,000
 
 
45,000
 

 As a percentage of existing store average size
  
155
%
 
143
%

 Total square footage under development
  
2,600,000
 
 
1,600,000
 

 As a percentage of existing square footage
  
50
%
 
35
%

 
  


 


   We will incur additional capital
expenditures during fiscal year 2005 in connection with ongoing equipment upgrades and resets at existing stores and continued development of management information systems. During the second quarter of fiscal year 2004, the Company loaned $13.5
million to a third-party real estate developer in connection with the construction of a new Company store. During the second quarter of fiscal year 2004, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Fresh & Wild Holdings Limited, which owned and
operated seven natural and organic food stores in London and Bristol, England, for a total of approximately $20 million in cash and approximately $16 million in Company common stock, totaling 238,735 shares. During the first quarter of fiscal year
2004, we acquired certain assets of Select Fish LLC, which owned and operated a seafood processing and distribution facility located in Seattle, Washington, in exchange for approximately $3 million in cash plus the assumption of certain liabilities.
During the first quarter of fiscal year 2002, the Company completed the acquisition of three Harry’s Farmer’s Market perishables superstores in Atlanta, Georgia in exchange for approximately $36 million in cash plus the assumption of
certain liabilities. Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $320.7 million, $177.4 million and $205.5 million in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Absent any significant cash acquisition or change in status of the
Company’s outstanding zero coupon convertible bond issue, we expect planned expansion and other anticipated working capital and capital expenditure requirements will be funded by cash generated from operations. We continually evaluate the need
to establish other sources of working capital and will seek those considered appropriate based upon the Company’s needs and market conditions.    Critical Accounting Policies    The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions
and factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate the continued appropriateness of our accounting policies and resulting estimates to make adjustments we consider appropriate under the facts and
circumstances.    We have chosen accounting policies that we believe are
appropriate to report accurately and fairly our operating results and financial position, and we apply those accounting policies in a consistent manner. Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 to the consolidated financial
statements. We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical in the preparation of our financial statements because they involve the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments about the effect of matters that are
inherently uncertain.    Insurance and Self-Insurance Reserves 
  The Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for the
potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability, property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the risks that are
retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial assumptions. While we believe that our assumptions are appropriate, the estimated accruals for
these liabilities could be significantly affected if future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical trends.    Inventory Valuation    We value our inventories at the lower of cost or market. Cost was determined using the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method for approximately 94.2% and 96.4% of inventories in fiscal years 2004 and 2003,
respectively. Under the LIFO method, the cost assigned to items sold is based on the cost of the most recent items purchased. As a result, the costs of the first items purchased remain in inventory and are used to value ending inventory. The excess
of estimated current costs over LIFO carrying value, or LIFO reserve, was approximately $11.2 million and $9.1 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively. Costs for the balance of inventories are determined by the first-in,
first-out (“FIFO”) method.   
26 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Cost was determined using the retail method for approximately 50% and 56% of inventories in fiscal years 2004 and 2003,
respectively. Under the retail method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the resulting gross margins are determined by applying a cost-to-retail ratio for various groupings of similar items to the retail value of inventories. Inherent in the
retail inventory method calculations are certain management judgments and estimates, including shrinkage, which could impact the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as the resulting gross margins. Cost was determined using the item cost
method for approximately 50% and 44% of inventories in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively. This method involves counting each item in inventory, assigning costs to each of these items based on the actual purchase costs (net of vendor
allowances) of each item and recording the actual cost of items sold. The item-cost method of accounting allows for more accurate reporting of periodic inventory balances and enables management to more precisely manage inventory and purchasing
levels when compared to the retail method of accounting. We believe we have the appropriate inventory valuation controls in place to minimize the risk that inventory values would be materially misstated.    Goodwill and Intangible Assets    We review goodwill for impairment on a reporting unit level annually, or more frequently if
impairment indicators arise. We allocate goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. We determine fair value utilizing both a market value method and discounted projected future cash flows compared to our carrying value for the
purpose of identifying impairment. Our evaluation of goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives for impairment requires extensive use of accounting judgment and financial estimates. Application of alternative assumptions and
definitions, such as reviewing goodwill for impairment at a different organizational level, could produce significantly different results.    Recent Accounting Pronouncements    The Emerging Issues Task Force (“EITF”) issued EITF No. 03-10, “Application of Issue No. 02-16 by Resellers to Sales Incentives Offered to Consumers by
Manufacturers,” in November 2003. EITF Issue No. 03-10 addresses the accounting for manufacturer sales incentives offered directly to consumers, including manufacturer coupons. EITF Issue No. 03-10 became effective the beginning of the second
quarter of fiscal year 2003. The adoption of EITF Issue No. 03-10 had no impact on our financial position or results of operations.    Disclaimer on Forward Looking Statements    Except for the historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this analysis are forward looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties,
including but not limited to general business conditions, the timely development and opening of new stores, the integration of acquired stores, the impact of competition and changes in government regulation. For a discussion of these and other risks
and uncertainties that may affect our business, see “Item 1. Business - Additional Factors That May Affect Future Results.” The Company does not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements.    
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.    We are exposed to interest rate changes and changes in market values of our investments, notes receivable and long-term debt. We are not a party to any derivative arrangement and do not use financial instruments for
trading or other speculative purposes. The impact of foreign exchange fluctuations on our foreign subsidiary is not material.    Interest Rate Risk    We seek to minimize the risks from interest rate fluctuations through ongoing evaluation of the composition of our investments and long-term debt. The Company holds interest-bearing instruments that are classified as
cash and cash equivalents. These investments are of a short-term nature, and therefore changes in interest rates would not likely have a material impact on the valuation of these instruments or interest income. We classify our cash equivalent
investments as available-for-sale and, accordingly, have recorded them at fair value on our balance sheets. We had cash equivalent investments totaling approximately $184.1 million and $162.0 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003,
respectively. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, our cash equivalent investments earned an average interest rate of approximately 2.4% and 2.3%, respectively. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, an unrealized loss of
approximately $0.4 million and an unrealized gain of approximately $0.1 million, respectively, related to cash equivalent investments was included as a component of shareholders’ equity. Our notes receivable and senior unsecured notes have
fixed interest rates, and the fair value of these instruments is affected by changes in market interest rates. The notes receivable earn interest at a fixed rate of 3.75% and had a carrying amount and fair value of approximately $13.5 million at
September 26, 2004.   
27 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
The senior unsecured notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 7.29% and had an outstanding balance of $11.4 million and
$17.1 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, the estimated fair value of the senior notes exceeded the carrying amount by approximately $0.6 million and $1.4 million,
respectively. Should interest rates increase or decrease, the estimated fair value of the senior notes would decrease or increase accordingly.    Interest Rate and Market Risk    Our subordinated convertible debentures have fixed interest rates, and the fair value of these instruments is affected by both changes in the market price of our stock
and changes in market interest rates. The zero coupon subordinated convertible debentures have an effective yield to maturity of 5% and had an outstanding balance of approximately $158.8 million and $151.4 million at September 26, 2004 and September
28, 2003, respectively. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003 the estimated fair value of the convertible debentures exceeded the carrying amount by approximately $137.1 million and $48.9 million, respectively. Should interest rates or the
market value of our stock increase or decrease, the estimated fair value of the zero coupon subordinated debentures would decrease or increase accordingly.    Market Risk    We regularly review the carrying value of our investments to identify and record losses when events and circumstances indicate that such declines in the fair value of such assets below our accounting basis are
other-than-temporary. During fiscal year 2004, we sold all of our investments in Gaiam, Inc for approximately $1.8 million, resulting in a loss of approximately $0.5 million. Our investments in Gaiam, Inc., a public company, consisted of 80,000
unrestricted common shares, which were classified as available-for-sale securities and 250,000 restricted common shares, for which we accounted using the cost method. During fiscal year 2003 we recognized losses totaling approximately $1.4 million
for other-than-temporary impairment of our unrestricted and restricted investments in Gaiam, Inc. common stock due to a sustained decline in market value of the stock below our carrying value. This impairment charge was recorded to adjust our
investments in Gaiam, Inc. to quoted market value. At September 28, 2003 our unrestricted and restricted shares of Gaiam Inc. had an adjusted cost basis of approximately $0.6 million and $1.7 million, respectively, and a fair value of approximately
$0.5 million and $1.5 million, respectively. At September 28, 2003, an unrealized loss of approximately $0.1 million related to our unrestricted shares was included as a component of shareholders’ equity.   
28 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.    
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Index to Consolidated Financial Statements   






 
  
PageNumber

 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
  
30

 
Consolidated Balance Sheets at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003
  
31

 
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the fiscal years ended September 26, 2004, September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002
  
32

 
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and Comprehensive Income for the fiscal years ended September 26, 2004, September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002
  
33

 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal years ended September 26, 2004, September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002
  
34

 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
  
35
    
29 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm    To the Board of Directors  Whole Foods Market, Inc.    We have audited the
accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Whole Foods Market, Inc. (“the Company”) as of September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, and the related consolidated statements of operations, shareholders’ equity and comprehensive
income, and cash flows for each of the three fiscal years in the period ended September 26, 2004. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements based on our audits.    We conducted our audits in accordance with the
standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit
includes consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.    In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the consolidated financial position of Whole Foods Market, Inc. as of September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, and the consolidated results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three fiscal years in the period ended
September 26, 2004, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.    As discussed in Note 3, the accompanying financial statements have been restated.   




/s/ Ernst & Young LLP

Austin, Texas

October 28, 2004 (except for Note 3, as to which the date is March 2, 2005)
  
30 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Consolidated Balance Sheets  (In thousands)  September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003   










 
  
 2004(Restated, see Note 3)
  
 2003(Restated, see Note 3)

 Assets
  
 
 
  
 
 

 Current assets:
  
 
 
  
 
 

 Cash and cash equivalents
  
$
198,377
  
$
165,779

 Restricted cash
  
 
23,160
  
 
—  

 Trade accounts receivable
  
 
64,972
  
 
45,947

 Merchandise inventories
  
 
152,912
  
 
123,904

 Prepaid expenses and other current assets
  
 
16,702
  
 
12,447

 Deferred income taxes
  
 
29,974
  
 
16,271

 
  


  



 Total current assets
  
 
486,097
  
 
364,348

 Property and equipment, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization
  
 
873,397
  
 
717,110

 Long-term investments
  
 
—  
  
 
2,206

 Goodwill
  
 
112,186
  
 
80,548

 Intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization
  
 
24,831
  
 
26,569

 Deferred income taxes
  
 
4,193
  
 
17,214

 Other assets
  
 
20,302
  
 
5,573

 
  


  



 Total assets
  
$
1,521,006
  
$
1,213,568

 
  


  







 
  
2004
  
2003

 Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
  
 
 
  
 
 

 Current liabilities:
  
 
 
  
 
 

 Current installments of long-term debt and capital lease obligations
  
$
5,973
  
$
5,806

 Trade accounts payable
  
 
90,751
  
 
72,715

 Accrued payroll, bonus and other benefits due team members
  
 
100,536
  
 
70,875

 Dividends payable
  
 
9,361
  
 
—  

 Other accrued expenses
  
 
128,329
  
 
93,378

 
  


  



 Total current liabilities
  
 
334,950
  
 
242,774

 Long-term debt and capital lease obligations, less current installments
  
 
164,770
  
 
162,909

 Deferred rent liabilities
  
 
70,067
  
 
60,608

 Other long-term liabilities
  
 
1,581
  
 
2,301

 
  


  



 Total liabilities
  
 
571,368
  
 
468,592

 
  


  



 Shareholders’ equity:
  
 
 
  
 
 

 Common stock, no par value, 150,000 shares authorized, 62,771 and 60,299 shares issued, 62,407 and 60,070 shares outstanding in 2004 and 2003,
respectively
  
 
535,107
  
 
423,297

 Accumulated other comprehensive income
  
 
2,053
  
 
1,624

 Retained earnings
  
 
412,478
  
 
320,055

 
  


  



 Total shareholders’ equity
  
 
949,638
  
 
744,976

 
  


  



 Commitments and contingencies
  
 
 
  
 
 

 Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
  
$
1,521,006
  
$
1,213,568

 
  


  


   The accompanying notes are an
integral part of these consolidated financial statements.     
31 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Consolidated Statements of Operations  (In thousands, except per share amounts)  Fiscal years ended September 26, 2004, September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002   
















 
  
 2004(Restated, see Note 3)
 
 
 2003(Restated, see Note 3)
 
 
 2002(Restated, see Note 3)
 

 Sales
  
$
3,864,950
 
 
 
3,148,593
 
 
$
2,690,475
 

 Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs
  
 
2,523,816
 
 
 
2,070,334
 
 
 
1,758,281
 

 
  



 



 




 Gross profit
  
 
1,341,134
 
 
 
1,078,259
 
 
 
932,194
 

 Direct store expenses
  
 
986,040
 
 
 
794,422
 
 
 
677,404
 

 General and administrative expenses
  
 
119,800
 
 
 
100,693
 
 
 
95,871
 

 Pre-opening and relocation costs
  
 
18,648
 
 
 
15,765
 
 
 
17,934
 

 
  



 



 




 Operating income
  
 
216,646
 
 
 
167,379
 
 
 
140,985
 

 Other income (expense):
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Interest expense
  
 
(7,249
)
 
 
(8,114
)
 
 
(10,384
)

 Investment and other income
  
 
6,456
 
 
 
5,593
 
 
 
2,056
 

 
  



 



 




 Income before income taxes
  
 
215,853
 
 
 
164,858
 
 
 
132,657
 

 Provision for income taxes
  
 
86,341
 
 
 
65,943
 
 
 
53,063
 

 
  



 



 




 Net income
  
$
129,512
 
 
$
98,915
 
 
$
79,594
 

 
  



 



 




 Basic earnings per share
  
$
2.11
 
 
$
1.68
 
 
$
1.41
 

 
  



 



 




 Weighted average shares outstanding
  
 
61,324
 
 
 
59,035
 
 
 
56,385
 

 
  



 



 




 Diluted earnings per share
  
$
1.98
 
 
$
1.58
 
 
$
1.32
 

 
  



 



 




 Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted basis
  
 
67,727
 
 
 
65,330
 
 
 
63,340
 

 
  



 



 




 Dividends per share
  
$
0.60
 
 
$
—  
 
 
$
—  
 

 
  



 



 



   The accompanying notes are an
integral part of these consolidated financial statements.   
32 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and Comprehensive Income  (In thousands)  Fiscal years ended September 26, 2004, September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002   

























 
  
SharesOutstanding
  
CommonStock
  
CommonStock inTreasury
 
 
AccumulatedOtherComprehensiveIncome (Loss)
 
 
RetainedEarnings(Restated,see Note 3)
 
 
 TotalShareholder’sEquity(Restated, see Note 3)
 

 Balances at September 30, 2001
  
54,770
  
$
251,679
  
$
(5,369
)
 
$
(30
)
 
$
141,546
 
 
$
387,826
 

 
  

  


  



 



 



 




 Net income
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
79,594
 
 
 
79,594
 

 Foreign currency translation adjustments
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
(112
)
 
 
—  
 
 
 
(112
)

 Change in unrealized gain (loss) on investments, net of income taxes
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
(280
)
 
 
—  
 
 
 
(280
)

 
  

  


  



 



 



 




 Comprehensive income
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
(392
)
 
 
79,594
 
 
 
79,202
 

 Issuance of common stock
  
2,521
  
 
61,595
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
61,595
 

 Issuance of common stock to 401(k) plan
  
106
  
 
4,475
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
4,475
 

 Issuance of common stock from treasury
  
342
  
 
—  
  
 
5,369
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
5,369
 

 Tax benefit related to exercise of team member stock options
  
—  
  
 
23,890
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
23,890
 

 Other
  
—  
  
 
301
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
301
 

 
  

  


  



 



 



 




 Balances at September 29, 2002
  
57,739
  
 
341,940
  
 
—  
 
 
 
(422
)
 
 
221,140
 
 
 
562,658
 

 
  

  


  



 



 



 




 Net income
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
98,915
 
 
 
98,915
 

 Foreign currency translation adjustments
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
1,798
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
1,798
 

 Reclassification adjustments for losses included in net income
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
280
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
280
 

 Change in unrealized gain (loss) on investments, net of income taxes
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
(32
)
 
 
—  
 
 
 
(32
)

 
  

  


  



 



 



 




 Comprehensive income
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
2,046
 
 
 
98,915
 
 
 
100,961
 

 Issuance of common stock
  
2,263
  
 
52,270
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
52,270
 

 Issuance of common stock to 401(k) plan
  
67
  
 
3,125
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
3,125
 

 Tax benefit related to exercise of team member stock options
  
—  
  
 
25,917
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
25,917
 

 Other
  
1
  
 
45
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
45
 

 
  

  


  



 



 



 




 Balances at September 28, 2003
  
60,070
  
 
423,297
  
 
—  
 
 
 
1,624
 
 
 
320,055
 
 
 
744,976
 

 
  

  


  



 



 



 




 Net income
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
129,512
 
 
 
129,512
 

 Foreign currency translation adjustments
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
856
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
856
 

 Reclassification adjustments for losses included in net income
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
88
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
88
 

 Change in unrealized gain (loss) on investments, net of income taxes
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
(515
)
 
 
—  
 
 
 
(515
)

 
  

  


  



 



 



 




 Comprehensive income
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
429
 
 
 
129,512
 
 
 
129,941
 

 Dividends ($0.60 per share)
  
—  
  
 
—  
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
(37,089
)
 
 
(37,089
)

 Issuance of common stock
  
2,092
  
 
59,518
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
59,518
 

 Issuance of common stock in connection with acquisition
  
239
  
 
16,375
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
16,375
 

 Tax benefit related to exercise of team member stock options
  
—  
  
 
35,583
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
35,583
 

 Other
  
6
  
 
334
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
334
 

 
  

  


  



 



 



 




 Balances at September 26, 2004
  
62,407
  
$
535,107
  
$
—  
 
 
$
2,053
 
 
$
412,478
 
 
$
949,638
 

 
  

  


  



 



 



 



   The accompanying notes are an
integral part of these consolidated financial statements.   
33 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows  (In thousands)  Fiscal years ended September 26, 2004, September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002   
















 
  
2004(Restated,see Note 3)
 
 
2003(Restated,see Note 3)
 
 
2002(Restated,see Note 3)
 

 Cash flows from operating activities
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Net income
  
$
129,512
 
 
$
98,915
 
 
$
79,594
 

 Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Depreciation and amortization
  
 
114,167
 
 
 
99,872
 
 
 
87,513
 

 Loss on disposal of fixed assets
  
 
5,769
 
 
 
771
 
 
 
3,138
 

 Deferred income tax expense (benefit)
  
 
(682
)
 
 
2,530
 
 
 
6,754
 

 Tax benefit related to exercise of team member stock options
  
 
35,583
 
 
 
25,917
 
 
 
23,890
 

 Interest accretion on long-term debt
  
 
7,551
 
 
 
7,339
 
 
 
7,048
 

 Deferred rent
  
 
12,099
 
 
 
8,887
 
 
 
9,063
 

 Other
  
 
(1,133
)
 
 
8,844
 
 
 
3,184
 

 Net change in current assets and liabilities:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Trade accounts receivable
  
 
(19,158
)
 
 
(15,209
)
 
 
(6,115
)

 Merchandise inventories
  
 
(27,868
)
 
 
(17,714
)
 
 
(3,096
)

 Prepaid expenses and other current assets
  
 
(2,940
)
 
 
(1,755
)
 
 
194
 

 Trade accounts payable
  
 
12,515
 
 
 
13,005
 
 
 
5,859
 

 Accrued payroll, bonus and other benefits due team member
  
 
29,646
 
 
 
11,516
 
 
 
17,609
 

 Other accrued expenses
  
 
35,279
 
 
 
38,100
 
 
 
(3,381
)

 
  



 



 




 Net cash provided by operating activities
  
 
330,340
 
 
 
281,018
 
 
 
231,254
 

 
  



 



 




 Cash flows from investing activities
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Development costs of new store locations
  
 
(156,728
)
 
 
(90,568
)
 
 
(102,109
)

 Other property, plant and equipment expenditures
  
 
(109,739
)
 
 
(84,103
)
 
 
(61,385
)

 Acquisition of intangible assets
  
 
(584
)
 
 
(6,456
)
 
 
(1,241
)

 Increase in notes receivable
  
 
(13,500
)
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 

 Increase in restricted cash
  
 
(23,160
)
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 

 Payment for purchase of acquired entities, net of cash acquired
  
 
(18,873
)
 
 
—  
 
 
 
(35,978
)

 Other investing activities
  
 
1,916
 
 
 
3,763
 
 
 
(4,753
)

 
  



 



 




 Net cash used in investing activities
  
 
(320,668
)
 
 
(177,364
)
 
 
(205,466
)

 
  



 



 




 Cash flows from financing activities
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Net proceeds from long-term borrowings
  
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 
 
 
32,000
 

 Dividends paid
  
 
(27,728
)
 
 
—  
 
 
 
—  
 

 Payments on long-term debt and capital lease obligations
  
 
(8,864
)
 
 
(5,835
)
 
 
(127,956
)

 Issuance of common stock
  
 
59,518
 
 
 
52,270
 
 
 
66,964
 

 
  



 



 




 Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
  
 
22,926
 
 
 
46,435
 
 
 
(28,992
)

 
  



 



 




 Cash flows from discontinued operations
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Net cash provided by discontinued operations
  
 
—  
 
 
 
3,044
 
 
 
14,007
 

 
  



 



 




 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents
  
 
32,598
 
 
 
153,133
 
 
 
10,803
 

 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
  
 
165,779
 
 
 
12,646
 
 
 
1,843
 

 
  



 



 




 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year
  
$
198,377
 
 
$
165,779
 
 
$
12,646
 

 
  



 



 




 Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Interest paid
  
$
2,127
 
 
$
2,084
 
 
$
5,224
 

 Federal and state income taxes paid
  
 
60,372
 
 
 
16,375
 
 
 
26,030
 

 
  



 



 




 Non-cash transactions:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Common stock issued in connection with acquisition
  
$
16,375
 
 
$
—  
 
 
$
—  
 

 
  



 



 



   The accompanying notes are an
integral part of these consolidated financial statements.     
34 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements  Fiscal years ended September 26, 2004, September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002   
(1) Description of Business    Whole Foods Market, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively “Whole Foods Market,” “Company,” or “We”) own and operate the
largest chain of natural and organic foods supermarkets. Our Company mission is to promote vitality and well-being for all individuals by supplying the highest quality, most wholesome foods available. Through our growth, we have had a large and
positive impact on the natural and organic foods movement throughout the United States, helping lead the industry to nationwide acceptance over the last 24 years. We opened our first store in Texas in 1980 and, as of September 26, 2004, have
expanded our operations both by opening new stores and acquiring existing stores from third parties to 163 stores: 154 stores in 28 U.S. states and the District of Columbia; two stores in Canada; and seven stores in the United Kingdom. 
  (2) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies    Definition of Fiscal Year    We report our results of operations on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the last
Sunday in September. Fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002 were 52-week years.    Principles of Consolidation    The accompanying consolidated
financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. All significant majority-owned subsidiaries are consolidated on a line-by-line basis, and all significant
intercompany accounts and transactions are eliminated upon consolidation.    Cash and Cash Equivalents    We consider all highly liquid
investments with an original maturity of 90 days or less to be cash equivalents.    Restricted Cash    Restricted cash primarily relates to cash
held as collateral to support projected workers’ compensation obligations which previously were secured by letters of credit outstanding under our line of credit facility.    Inventories    We value our inventories at the lower of cost or market. Cost was determined using the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method for approximately 94.2% and 96.4% of
inventories in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively. Under the LIFO method, the cost assigned to items sold is based on the cost of the most recent items purchased. As a result, the costs of the first items purchased remain in inventory and are
used to value ending inventory. The excess of estimated current costs over LIFO carrying value, or LIFO reserve, was approximately $11.2 million and $9.1 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively. Costs for the balance of
inventories are determined by the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method.    Cost was determined using the retail method for approximately 50% and 56% of inventories in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively. Under the retail method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the resulting gross margins are
determined by applying a cost-to-retail ratio for various groupings of similar items to the retail value of inventories. Inherent in the retail inventory method calculations are certain management judgments and estimates, including shrinkage, which
could impact the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as the resulting gross margins. Cost was determined using the item cost method for approximately 50% and 44% of inventories in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively. This method involves
counting each item in inventory, assigning costs to each of these items based on the actual purchase costs (net of vendor allowances) of each item and recording the actual cost of items sold. The item-cost method of accounting allows for more
accurate reporting of periodic inventory balances and enables management to more precisely manage inventory and purchasing levels when compared to the retail method of accounting.    Our largest supplier, United Natural Foods, Inc., accounted for approximately 20%, 18% and 14% of our total purchases in fiscal years 2004,
2003 and 2002, respectively.   
35 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    Balances of inventories are as follows (in thousands):   










 
  
2004
  
2003

 Manufactured inventories:
  
 
 
  
 
 

 Raw materials
  
$
4,305
  
$
3,318

 Finished goods
  
 
624
  
 
401

 
  


  



 Total manufactured inventories
  
 
4,929
  
 
3,719

 
  


  



 Other inventories, net of LIFO reserve
  
 
147,983
  
 
120,185

 
  


  



 
  
$
152,912
  
$
123,904

 
  


  


   Property and Equipment
   Property and equipment is stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation
and amortization. We provide depreciation of equipment over the estimated useful lives (generally three to 15 years) using the straight-line method. We provide amortization of leasehold improvements on the straight-line method over the shorter of
the estimated useful lives of the improvements or the terms of the related leases. Terms of leases used in the determination of estimated useful lives may include renewal periods at the Company’s option if exercise of the option is determined
to be reasonably assured at the inception of the lease. We provide depreciation of buildings over the estimated useful lives (generally 20 to 30 years) using the straight-line method. Costs related to a projected site determined to be unsatisfactory
and general site selection costs that cannot be identified with a specific store location are charged to operations currently. Repair and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred. Interest costs on significant projects constructed or developed for
the Company’s own use are capitalized as a separate component of the asset. Upon retirement or disposal of assets, the cost and related accumulated depreciation are removed from the balance sheet and any gain or loss is reflected in earnings.
   Operating Leases    The Company leases stores, distribution centers, bakehouses and administrative facilities
under operating leases. Store lease agreements generally include rent holidays, rent escalation clauses and contingent rent provisions for percentage of sales in excess of specified levels. Most of our lease agreements include renewal periods at the
Company’s option. We recognize rent holiday periods and scheduled rent increases on a straight-line basis over the lease term beginning with the date the Company takes possession of the leased space. We record tenant improvement allowances and
rent holidays as deferred rent liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and amortize the deferred rent over the terms of the lease to rent expense on the consolidated statements of operations. We record rent liabilities on the consolidated
balance sheets for contingent percentage of sales lease provisions when we determine that it is probable that the specified levels will be reached during the fiscal year.    Investments    We classify as available-for-sale our cash equivalent investments and long-term investments in equity securities that have readily determinable fair values.
Available-for-sale investments are recorded at fair value. Unrealized holding gains and losses, net of the related tax effect, on available-for-sale investments are excluded from earnings and are reported as a separate component of
shareholders’ equity until realized. A decline in the fair value of any available-for-sale security below cost that is deemed to be other-than-temporary or for a period greater than two fiscal quarters results in a reduction in carrying amount
to fair value. The impairment is charged to earnings and a new cost basis of the security is established. Cost basis is established and maintained utilizing the specific identification method.    Goodwill    Goodwill consists of the excess of cost of acquired enterprises over the sum of the amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired less
liabilities assumed. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently if impairment indicators arise, on a reporting unit level. We allocate goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. We determine fair value
utilizing both a market value method and discounted projected future cash flows compared to our carrying value for the purpose of identifying impairment. Our annual impairment review requires extensive use of accounting judgment and financial
estimates. Application of alternative assumptions and definitions, such as reviewing goodwill for impairment at a different organizational level, could produce significantly different results.   
36 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    Intangible Assets    Intangible assets include acquired
leasehold rights, license agreements, non-competition agreements and debt issuance costs. All of the Company’s acquired identifiable intangible assets are subject to amortization. Amortization expense is recorded on a straight-line basis over
the life of the related agreement, currently one to 26 years for contract-based intangible assets and one to five years for marketing-related and other identifiable intangible assets.    Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Long-Lived Assets to be Disposed of    We evaluate long-lived assets and identifiable intangibles for impairment whenever events or
changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted cash flows expected to
be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported
at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. When the Company commits to relocate a location, a charge to write down the related assets to their estimated net recoverable value is included in the “Pre-opening and
relocation costs” line item in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.    Fair Value of Financial Instruments    The carrying amounts of
cash and cash equivalents, trade accounts receivable, trade accounts payable, accrued payroll, bonuses and team member benefits, and other accrued expenses approximate fair value because of the short maturity of those instruments. Investments are
stated at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included as a component of shareholders’ equity until realized.    The fair value of notes receivable and convertible subordinated debentures are estimated using quoted market prices. The fair value of senior unsecured notes is estimated
by discounting the future cash flows at the rates currently available to us for similar debt instruments of comparable maturities. Carrying amounts and estimated fair values of our financial instruments other than those for which carrying amounts
approximate fair values as noted above are as follows (in thousands):   
















 
  
2004
  
2003

 
  
CarryingAmount
  
Estimated FairValue
  
CarryingAmount
  
Estimated FairValue

 Notes receivable
  
$
13,500
  
$
13,530
  
$
—  
  
$
—  

 Convertible subordinated debentures
  
 
158,791
  
 
295,923
  
 
151,449
  
 
200,396

 Senior unsecured notes
  
 
11,429
  
 
12,009
  
 
17,143
  
 
18,507

 
  


  


  


  


   Insurance and Self-Insurance
Reserves    The Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance
plans to provide for the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability, property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with
the risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial assumptions. While we believe that our assumptions are appropriate, the
estimated accruals for these liabilities could be significantly affected if future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical trends.   
Revenue Recognition    We recognize revenue for sales of our products at the point of sale. Discounts provided to customers at the point of sale are recognized as a reduction in sales as the products are sold.    Cost of Goods Sold and Occupancy Costs    Cost of goods sold includes cost of inventory sold during the period, net of discounts and
allowances, contribution from non-retail distribution and food preparation operations, shipping and handling cost and occupancy cost. The Company receives various rebates from third party vendors in the form of quantity discounts and payments under
cooperative advertising agreements. Such rebates are classified as either a reduction to cost of goods sold or a reduction of cost incurred, depending on the nature of the rebate, and are recognized when the related merchandise is sold. 
 
37 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    Advertising    Advertising and marketing expense for fiscal
years 2004, 2003 and 2002 was approximately $17.4 million, $15.4 million and $11.1 million, respectively. These amounts are shown net of vendor allowances received for co-operative advertising of approximately $1.0 million, $2.2 million and $2.2
million in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Advertising costs are charged to expense as incurred and are included in the “Direct store expenses” line item in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Effective the beginning
of our second quarter of fiscal year 2003, allowances received for co-operative advertising in excess of identifiable advertising costs are recognized as a reduction to cost of goods sold when the related merchandise is sold.    Pre-opening and Relocation Costs    Pre-opening costs include rent expense incurred during construction of new stores and costs
related to new store openings including costs associated with hiring and training personnel, supplies and other miscellaneous costs. Rent expense is generally incurred for six months prior to a store’s opening date. Other pre-opening costs are
incurred primarily in the 30 days prior to a new store opening. Pre-opening costs are expensed as incurred. Relocation costs, which consist of moving costs, remaining lease payments, accelerated depreciation costs, asset impairment costs, other
costs associated with replaced facilities and other related expenses, are expensed as incurred.    Income Taxes    We recognize deferred
income tax assets and liabilities by applying statutory tax rates in effect at the balance sheet date to differences between the book basis and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted
tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted to reflect changes in tax laws or rates in the period that
includes the enactment date.    Stock-Based Compensation    In accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (“SFAS”) No. 123,
“Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation” and SFAS No. 148, “Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation – Transition and Disclosure,” we continue to apply Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25 (“APB No. 25”),
“Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees” and related interpretations in accounting for our stock option grants. APB No. 25 provides that the compensation expense relative to our team member stock options is measured based on the
intrinsic value of the stock option at date of grant.    As required by SFAS No.
123 and 148, we have determined pro forma net income and earnings per common share as if compensation costs had been determined based on the fair value of the options granted to team members and then recognized ratably over the vesting period. The
fair value of stock option grants has been estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes multiple option pricing model with the following weighted average assumptions:   













 
  
2004
 
 
2003
 
 
2002
 

 Expected dividend yield
  
0.76
%
 
0.00
%
 
0.00
%

 Risk-free interest rate
  
4.72
%
 
2.78
%
 
5.38
%

 Expected volatility
  
49.48
%
 
51.09
%
 
51.97
%

 Expected life, in years
  
3.30
 
 
3.72
 
 
3.68
 

 
  


 


 


    
38 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    Had we
recognized compensation costs as prescribed by SFAS No. 123, net income, basic earnings per share and diluted earnings per share would have changed to the pro forma amounts shown below (in thousands, except per share data):   
















 
  
2004
 
 
2003
 
 
2002
 

 Net income:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 As reported
  
$
129,512
 
 
$
98,915
 
 
$
79,594
 

 Pro forma expense, net of income taxes
  
 
(23,888
)
 
 
(17,675
)
 
 
(14,059
)

 
  



 



 




 Pro forma net income
  
$
105,624
 
 
$
81,240
 
 
$
65,535
 

 
  



 



 









 Basic earnings per share:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 As reported
  
$
2.11
 
 
$
1.68
 
 
$
1.41
 

 Pro forma adjustment
  
 
(0.39
)
 
 
(0.30
)
 
 
(0.25
)

 
  



 



 




 Pro forma basic earnings per share
  
$
1.72
 
 
$
1.38
 
 
$
1.16
 

 
  



 



 









 Diluted earnings per share:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 As reported
  
$
1.98
 
 
$
1.58
 
 
$
1.32
 

 Pro forma adjustment
  
 
(0.33
)
 
 
(0.25
)
 
 
(0.21
)

 
  



 



 




 Pro forma diluted earnings per share
  
$
1.65
 
 
$
1.33
 
 
$
1.11
 

 
  



 



 



   Earnings per Share 
  Basic earnings per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding during the fiscal period. Diluted earnings per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares outstanding plus, where applicable, the additional common shares that would have been outstanding as a result of the conversion
of dilutive options and convertible debt.    Comprehensive Income
   Comprehensive income consists of net income, foreign currency translation
adjustment and unrealized gains and losses on marketable securities, net of income taxes. Comprehensive income is reflected in the consolidated statements of shareholders’ equity and comprehensive income. At September 26, 2004 and September 28,
2003, accumulated other comprehensive income consisted of foreign currency translation adjustment gains of approximately $2.5 million and $1.7 million, respectively, and unrealized losses on marketable securities of approximately $0.5 million and
$32,000, respectively.    Foreign Currency Translation    The Company’s Canadian and United Kingdom operations use their local currency as their
functional currency. Assets and liabilities are translated at exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet date. Income and expense accounts are translated at the average monthly exchange rates during the year. Resulting translation adjustments are
recorded as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive income.    Segment Information    We operate in one reportable segment,
natural foods supermarkets. We currently have two stores in Canada and seven stores in the United Kingdom. All of our remaining operations are domestic.    Use of Estimates    The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and revenues and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We use estimates when accounting for depreciation and
amortization, allowance for doubtful accounts, long-term investments, team member benefit plans, team member health insurance plans, workers’ compensation liabilities, income taxes, reorganization reserves and contingencies.    Reclassifications    Where appropriate, we have reclassified prior years’ financial statements to conform to current year presentation.    Recent Accounting Pronouncements    The EITF issued EITF No. 03-10, “Application of Issue No. 02-16 by Resellers to Sales
Incentives Offered to Consumers by Manufacturers,” in November 2003. EITF Issue No. 03-10 addresses the accounting for manufacturer sales incentives offered   
39 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    directly to consumers, including manufacturer coupons. EITF Issue No. 03-10 became effective the beginning of the second quarter of fiscal year 2003. The adoption of EITF Issue No. 03-10 had no impact on our financial position or results of
operations.    (3) Restatement of Financial Statements    The Company completed a review of its historical lease accounting methods to determine
whether these methods were in accordance with the views expressed by the Office of the Chief Accountant of the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on February 7, 2005 in a letter to the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants and other recent interpretations regarding certain operating lease accounting issues and their application under GAAP. As a result of its review, the Company determined that its historical methods of accounting for rent holidays and
tenant improvement allowances, and of determining lives used in the calculation of depreciation of leasehold improvements and straight-line rent determination for certain leased properties, were not in accordance with GAAP.    The Company historically had recognized rent holiday periods and scheduled rent increases on
a straight-line basis over the lease term beginning with the commencement date of the lease which is typically the store opening date. The Company has determined that the lease term should commence on the date the Company takes possession of the
leased space, which is generally six months prior to a store’s opening date. Additionally, the Company has determined that rent expense should be recorded on a straight-line basis over lease periods that are consistent with or greater than the
number of periods over which depreciation of leasehold improvements is recorded. Historically, the life used for rent expense purposes in some instances was shorter than the life used for depreciation purposes. Excluding tax impacts, the Company has
recorded adjustments to “Other accrued expenses,” “Deferred rent liabilities,” “Property and equipment” and “Retained earnings” on the consolidated balance sheets and to “Direct store expenses,”
“Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs” and “Pre-opening and relocation costs” on the consolidated statements of operations to correct historical accounting methods.    The Company historically accounted for tenant improvement allowances as reductions to the related leasehold improvement assets on the
consolidated balance sheets and as capital expenditures in investing activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows. Management determined these allowances should be recorded as deferred rent liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets
and as a component of operating activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows. Additionally, this change results in a reclassification of the deferred rent amortization from “Direct store expenses” to “Cost of goods sold and
occupancy costs” on the consolidated statements of operations.    The
Company has restated its consolidated balance sheets as of September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, and the related consolidated statements of operations, shareholders’ equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the three
fiscal years in the period ended September 26, 2004 for the misstatements discussed above. The cumulative effect of these accounting changes is a reduction to retained earnings of $21.5 million as of the beginning of fiscal year 2002 and incremental
decreases to retained earnings of $4.9 million, $4.8 million and $7.6 million for the fiscal years 2002, 2003 and 2004, respectively.   
40 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    Following is a summary of the effects of these accounting corrections on the consolidated balance sheets as of September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003 (in thousands):   














 September 26, 2004
  
PreviouslyReported
  
Adjustments
 
 
Restated

 Current deferred income tax asset
  
$
28,894
  
$
1,080
 
 
$
29,974

 Total current assets
  
 
485,017
  
 
1,080
 
 
 
486,097

 Property and equipment, net
  
 
877,457
  
 
(4,060
)
 
 
873,397

 Long-term deferred income tax asset
  
 
—  
  
 
4,193
 
 
 
4,193

 Total assets
  
 
1,519,793
  
 
1,213
 
 
 
1,521,006

 Other accrued expenses
  
 
124,641
  
 
3,688
 
 
 
128,329

 Total current liabilities
  
 
331,262
  
 
3,688
 
 
 
334,950

 Deferred rent liabilities
  
 
13,566
  
 
56,501
 
 
 
70,067

 Long-term deferred income tax liability
  
 
20,175
  
 
(20,175
)
 
 
—  

 Total liabilities
  
 
531,354
  
 
40,014
 
 
 
571,368

 Retained earnings
  
 
451,279
  
 
(38,801
)
 
 
412,478

 Total shareholders’ equity
  
 
988,439
  
 
(38,801
)
 
 
949,638

 Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
  
$
1,519,793
  
$
1,213
 
 
$
1,521,006

 
  


  



 








 September 28, 2003
  
PreviouslyReported
  
Adjustments
 
 
Restated

 Current deferred income tax asset
  
$
15,607
  
$
664
 
 
$
16,271

 Total current assets
  
 
363,684
  
 
664
 
 
 
364,348

 Property and equipment, net
  
 
718,240
  
 
(1,130
)
 
 
717,110

 Long-term deferred income tax asset
  
 
—  
  
 
17,214
 
 
 
17,214

 Total assets
  
 
1,196,820
  
 
16,748
 
 
 
1,213,568

 Other accrued expenses
  
 
90,188
  
 
3,190
 
 
 
93,378

 Total current liabilities
  
 
239,584
  
 
3,190
 
 
 
242,774

 Deferred rent liabilities
  
 
13,349
  
 
47,259
 
 
 
60,608

 Long-term deferred income tax liability
  
 
2,501
  
 
(2,501
)
 
 
—  

 Total liabilities
  
 
420,644
  
 
47,948
 
 
 
468,592

 Retained earnings
  
 
351,255
  
 
(31,200
)
 
 
320,055

 Total shareholders’ equity
  
 
776,176
  
 
(31,200
)
 
 
744,976

 Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
  
$
1,196,820
  
$
16,748
 
 
$
1,213,568

 
  


  



 


   Following is a summary of the effects
of these accounting corrections on the consolidated statements of operations for the three fiscal years ended September 26, 2004 (in thousands):   














 Fiscal year ended September 26, 2004
  
PreviouslyReported
  
Adjustments
 
 
Restated

 Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs
  
$
2,521,611
  
$
2,205
 
 
$
2,523,816

 Gross profit
  
 
1,343,339
  
 
(2,205
)
 
 
1,341,134

 Direct store expenses
  
 
983,765
  
 
2,275
 
 
 
986,040

 Pre-opening and relocation costs
  
 
10,459
  
 
8,189
 
 
 
18,648

 Operating income
  
 
229,315
  
 
(12,669
)
 
 
216,646

 Income before income taxes
  
 
228,522
  
 
(12,669
)
 
 
215,853

 Provision for income taxes
  
 
91,409
  
 
(5,068
)
 
 
86,341

 Net income
  
$
137,113
  
$
(7,601
)
 
$
129,512

 Basic earnings per share
  
$
2.24
  
$
(0.13
)
 
$
2.11

 Diluted earnings per share
  
$
2.09
  
$
(0.11
)
 
$
1.98

 
  


  



 


  
41 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)   














 Fiscal year ended September 28, 2003
  
PreviouslyReported
  
Adjustments
 
 
Restated

 Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs
  
$
2,067,939
  
$
2,395
 
 
$
2,070,334

 Gross profit
  
 
1,080,654
  
 
(2,395
)
 
 
1,078,259

 Direct store expenses
  
 
792,536
  
 
1,886
 
 
 
794,422

 Pre-opening and relocation costs
  
 
12,091
  
 
3,674
 
 
 
15,765

 Operating income
  
 
175,334
  
 
(7,955
)
 
 
167,379

 Income before income taxes
  
 
172,813
  
 
(7,955
)
 
 
164,858

 Provision for income taxes
  
 
69,126
  
 
(3,183
)
 
 
65,943

 Net income
  
$
103,687
  
$
(4,772
)
 
$
98,915

 Basic earnings per share
  
$
1.76
  
$
(0.08
)
 
$
1.68

 Diluted earnings per share
  
$
1.66
  
$
(0.08
)
 
$
1.58

 
  


  



 








 Fiscal year ended September 29, 2002
  
PreviouslyReported
  
Adjustments
 
 
Restated

 Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs
  
$
1,757,213
  
$
1,068
 
 
$
1,758,281

 Gross profit
  
 
933,262
  
 
(1,068
)
 
 
932,194

 Direct store expenses
  
 
675,760
  
 
1,644
 
 
 
677,404

 Pre-opening and relocation costs
  
 
12,485
  
 
5,449
 
 
 
17,934

 Operating income
  
 
149,146
  
 
(8,161
)
 
 
140,985

 Income before income taxes
  
 
140,818
  
 
(8,161
)
 
 
132,657

 Provision for income taxes
  
 
56,327
  
 
(3,264
)
 
 
53,063

 Net income
  
$
84,491
  
$
(4,897
)
 
$
79,594

 Basic earnings per share
  
$
1.50
  
$
(0.09
)
 
$
1.41

 Diluted earnings per share
  
$
1.40
  
$
(0.08
)
 
$
1.32

 
  


  



 


   Following is a summary of the effects
of these accounting corrections on the consolidated statements of shareholders’ equity and comprehensive income as of September 30, 2001 (in thousands):   














 September 30, 2001
  
PreviouslyReported
  
Adjustments
 
 
Restated

 Retained earnings
  
$
163,077
  
$
(21,531
)
 
$
141,546

 
  


  



 


   Following is a summary of the effects
of these accounting corrections on the consolidated statements of cash flows for the three fiscal years ended September 26, 2004.   
















 Fiscal year ended September 26, 2004
  
PreviouslyReported
 
 
Adjustments
 
 
Restated
 

 Net cash provided by operating activities
  
$
328,826
 
 
$
1,514
 
 
$
330,340
 

 Net cash used in investing activities
  
$
(319,154
)
 
$
(1,514
)
 
$
(320,668
)

 
  



 



 









 Fiscal year ended September 28, 2003
  
PreviouslyReported
 
 
Adjustments
 
 
Restated
 

 Net cash provided by operating activities
  
$
279,457
 
 
$
1,561
 
 
$
281,018
 

 Net cash used in investing activities
  
$
(175,803
)
 
$
(1,561
)
 
$
(177,364
)

 
  



 



 









 Fiscal year ended September 29, 2002
  
PreviouslyReported
 
 
Adjustments
 
 
Restated
 

 Net cash provided by operating activities
  
$
229,145
 
 
$
2,109
 
 
$
231,254
 

 Net cash used in investing activities
  
$
(203,357
)
 
$
(2,109
)
 
$
(205,466
)

 
  



 



 



    
42 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    (4)
Property and Equipment    Balances of major classes of property and
equipment are as follows (in thousands):   










 
  
2004
  
2003

 Land
  
$
17,485
  
$
17,793

 Buildings and leasehold improvements
  
 
655,572
  
 
574,959

 Fixtures and equipment
  
 
608,934
  
 
509,481

 Construction in progress and equipment not yet in service
  
 
103,698
  
 
45,936

 
  


  



 
  
 
1,385,689
  
 
1,148,169

 Less accumulated depreciation and amortization
  
 
512,292
  
 
431,059

 
  


  



 
  
$
873,397
  
$
717,110

 
  


  


   Depreciation and amortization expense
related to property and equipment totaled approximately $111.2 million, $97.0 million and $83.9 million for fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Property and equipment included accumulated accelerated depreciation and other asset
impairments totaling approximately $1.9 million and $1.0 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively. Property and equipment includes approximately $2.1 million, $1.4 million and $1.3 million of interest capitalized during
fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Development costs of new store locations totaled approximately $156.7 million, $90.6 million and $102.1 million in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. As of November 30, 2004, we had signed
leases for 53 stores under development.    (5) Business Combinations
   Fresh & Wild Holdings Limited    On January 31, 2004, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Fresh & Wild Holdings
Limited (“Fresh & Wild”) for a total of approximately $20 million in cash and approximately $16 million in Company common stock, totaling 238,735 shares. The acquisition of Fresh & Wild, which owned and operated seven natural and
organic food stores in London and Bristol, England, provided a platform for expansion of the Whole Foods Market brand in the United Kingdom. This transaction was accounted for using the purchase method and, accordingly, the purchase price has been
allocated to tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Total costs in excess of tangible and intangible assets acquired of approximately $30.5 million have been recorded as
goodwill. The Company also agreed to an additional purchase price consideration contingent on the market price of Company common stock at January 31, 2006. If the market price of Company stock at January 31, 2006 is less than the market price at
acquisition of $68.59 per share, those sellers who received and continuously hold through January 31, 2006 Company common stock are eligible to receive an amount, in stock, cash or any combination thereof, equal to the deficit multiplied by the
number of shares continuously held. Fresh & Wild results of operations are included in our consolidated statements of operations for the period beginning February 1, 2004 through September 26, 2004. John Mackey, our Chief Executive Officer and
Walter Robb, our Co-President and Chief Operating Officer each owned approximately 0.2% of the outstanding stock of Fresh & Wild and received proceeds totaling approximately $54,000 and $78,000, respectively, as consideration for their ownership
interest.    Select Fish LLC    On October 27, 2003, we acquired certain assets of Select Fish LLC (“Select Fish”)
in exchange for approximately $3 million in cash plus the assumption of certain liabilities. All assets acquired relate to a seafood processing and distribution facility located in Seattle, Washington. This transaction was accounted for using the
purchase method. Accordingly the purchase price has been allocated to tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values at the date of the acquisition. Total costs in excess of tangible and intangible assets
acquired of approximately $1.1 million have been recorded as goodwill. Select Fish results of operations are included in our consolidated statements of operations for the period beginning October 27, 2003 through September 26, 2004.    Harry’s Farmers Markets    On October 31, 2001, we completed the acquisition of certain assets of Harry’s Farmers
Markets, Inc. in exchange for approximately $36 million in cash plus the assumption of certain liabilities. The assets acquired are all assets relating to the three perishables superstores in Atlanta, Georgia, including but not limited to real
estate, the Harry’s Farmers Market trade name, distribution center and other support and office facilities. This transaction was accounted for using the purchase method. Accordingly, the purchase price has been allocated to tangible and
identifiable intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Total costs in excess of tangible and intangible assets acquired of approximately $8.7 million have been recorded as goodwill. Results of these
acquired operations are included in our consolidated statements of operations for the period beginning October 31, 2001 through September 29, 2002 and all subsequent periods.   
43 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    (6)
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets    Goodwill and indefinite-lived
intangible assets are reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently if impairment indicators arise. We allocate goodwill to one reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. We acquired goodwill totaling approximately $31.7 million in
connection with the acquisition of Select Fish and Fresh and Wild during fiscal year 2004 and $8.7 million in connection with acquisition of Harry’s Farmers Market during fiscal year 2002. There was no impairment of goodwill or indefinite-lived
intangible assets during fiscal years 2004, 2003 or 2002.    All of our acquired
identifiable intangible assets are amortized over the useful life of the related agreement. We acquired intangible assets totaling approximately $0.6 million and $6.5 million during fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively, consisting primarily of
acquired leasehold rights. Amortization associated with intangible assets totaled approximately $3.0 million and $2.9 million during fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively. The components of intangible assets were as follows (in thousands):
  


















 
  
2004
 
 
2003
 

 
  
Gross carryingamount
  
Accumulatedamortization
 
 
Gross carryingamount
  
Accumulatedamortization
 

 Contract-based
  
$
36,088
  
$
(12,467
)
 
$
34,816
  
$
(10,082
)

 Marketing-related and other
  
 
3,599
  
 
(2,389
)
 
 
3,440
  
 
(1,605
)

 
  


  



 


  



   Amortization associated with the net
carrying amount of intangible assets is estimated to be $3.0 million in fiscal year 2005, $2.4 million in fiscal year 2006, $1.6 million in fiscal year 2007, $1.5 million in fiscal year 2008 and $1.4 million in fiscal year 2009.    (7) Long-Term Debt    We have long-term debt and obligations under capital leases as follows (in thousands):   










 
  
2004
  
2003

 Obligations under capital lease agreements for equipment, due in monthly installments through 2006
  
$
523
  
$
36

 Senior unsecured notes
  
 
11,429
  
 
17,143

 Convertible debentures, including accreted interest
  
 
158,791
  
 
151,449

 Other notes payable
  
 
—  
  
 
87

 
  


  



 
  
 
170,743
  
 
168,715

 Less current installments
  
 
5,973
  
 
5,806

 
  


  



 
  
$
164,770
  
$
162,909

 
  


  


   On October 1, 2004, we amended our
credit facility to extend the maturity of our $100 million revolving line of credit to October 1, 2009. The credit agreement contains certain affirmative covenants including maintenance of certain financial ratios and certain negative covenants
including limitations on additional indebtedness as defined in the agreement. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, we were in compliance with the applicable debt covenants. All outstanding amounts borrowed under this agreement bear interest
at our option of either a defined base rate or the LIBOR rate plus a premium. Commitment fees of 0.15% of the undrawn amount are payable under this agreement. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003 no amounts were drawn under the agreement.
The amounts available to the Company under the agreement were effectively reduced to $96.5 million and $80.2 million by outstanding letters of credit totaling approximately $3.5 million and $19.8 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003,
respectively.    We have outstanding zero coupon convertible subordinated
debentures which had a carrying amount of approximately $158.8 million and $151.4 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively. The debentures have an effective yield to maturity of 5 percent and a principal amount at maturity
on March 2, 2018 of approximately $308.8 million. The debentures are convertible at the option of the holder, at any time on or prior to maturity, unless previously redeemed or otherwise purchased. The debentures have a conversion rate of 10.640
shares per $1,000 principal amount at maturity, representing approximately 3,280,000 shares. The debentures may be redeemed at the option of the holder on   
44 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    March
2, 2008 or March 2, 2013 at the issue price plus accrued original discount totaling approximately $188 million and $241 million, respectively. No debentures were redeemed at the option of the holder on the potential redemption date of March 2, 2003.
   Subject to certain limitations, at our option, we may elect to pay this
purchase price in cash, shares of common stock or any combination thereof. The debentures may also be redeemed in cash at the option of the holder if there is a change in control at the issue price plus accrued original discount to the date of
redemption. The Company may redeem the debentures for cash, in whole or in part, at redemption prices equal to the issue price plus accrued original discount to the date of redemption. The debentures are subordinated in the right of payment to all
existing and future senior indebtedness.    We also have outstanding senior
unsecured notes that bear interest at 7.29% payable quarterly with a carrying amount of approximately $11.4 million and $17.1 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively. Principal on the senior notes is payable in annual
installments of approximately $5.7 million through May 16, 2006.    (8) Leases
   The Company is committed under certain capital leases for rental of
equipment and certain operating leases for rental of facilities and equipment. These leases expire or become subject to renewal clauses at various dates from 2004 to 2040. Amortization of equipment under capital lease is included with depreciation
expense.    Rental expense charged to operations under operating leases for
fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002 totaled approximately $99.4 million, $83.5 million and $73.3 million, respectively. Minimum rental commitments required by all non-cancelable leases are approximately as follows (in thousands):   










 
  
Capital
  
Operating

 2005
  
$
286
  
$
100,169

 2006
  
 
241
  
 
123,464

 2007
  
 
55
  
 
131,642

 2008
  
 
0
  
 
133,028

 2009
  
 
0
  
 
130,224

 Future fiscal years
  
 
0
  
 
1,932,655

 
  


  



 
  
 
582
  
$
2,551,182

 
  
 
 
  



 Less amounts representing interest
  
 
59
  
 
 

 
  


  
 
 

 
  
 
523
  
 
 

 Less current installments
  
 
259
  
 
 

 
  


  
 
 

 
  
$
264
  
 
 

 
  


  
 
 
   During fiscal years 2004, 2003 and
2002, we paid contingent rentals of approximately $4.8 million, $4.2 million and $3.7 million, respectively. No asset retirement obligations have been incurred associated with operating leases. Sublease rental income totaled approximately $1.5
million, $1.1 million and $0.9 million during fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively.    John P. Mackey and Glenda Flanagan, executive officers of the Company, own approximately 51% and 2%, respectively, of BookPeople, Inc., a retailer of books and periodicals that is unaffiliated with the Company, which
leases retail space in Austin, Texas from the Company. The lease provides for an aggregate annual minimum rent of approximately $0.4 million which the Company received in rental income in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002. The Company expects to
assign the rights associated with this lease during fiscal year 2005 in connection with the relocation of its corporate headquarters.    (9) Income Taxes    Components of income tax expense attributable to continuing operations are as follows (in thousands):   















 
  
2004
 
 
2003
 
 
2002

 Current federal income tax
  
$
70,750
 
 
$
51,682
 
 
$
41,111

 Current state income tax
  
 
16,272
 
 
 
11,732
 
 
 
5,198

 
  



 



 



 Total current tax
  
 
87,022
 
 
 
63,414
 
 
 
46,309

 
  



 



 



 Deferred federal income tax
  
 
284
 
 
 
2,851
 
 
 
4,539

 Deferred state income tax
  
 
(965
)
 
 
(322
)
 
 
2,215

 
  



 



 



 Total deferred tax
  
 
(681
)
 
 
2,529
 
 
 
6,754

 
  



 



 



 Total income tax expense
  
$
86,341
 
 
$
65,943
 
 
$
53,063

 
  



 



 


  
45 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    Actual
income tax expense differed from the amount computed by applying statutory corporate income tax rates to income from continuing operations before income taxes as follows (in thousands):   
















 
  
2004
 
 
2003
 
 
2002
 

 Federal tax based on statutory rates
  
$
75,548
 
 
$
57,700
 
 
$
46,431
 

 Increase (reduction) in income taxes resulting from:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Increase (decrease) in valuation allowance
  
 
—  
 
 
 
(42
)
 
 
(295
)

 Deductible state income taxes
  
 
(5,357
)
 
 
(3,994
)
 
 
(2,595
)

 Other, net
  
 
843
 
 
 
869
 
 
 
2,109
 

 
  



 



 




 Total federal taxes
  
 
71,034
 
 
 
54,533
 
 
 
45,650
 

 State income taxes
  
 
15,307
 
 
 
11,410
 
 
 
7,413
 

 
  



 



 




 Total income tax expense
  
$
86,341
 
 
$
65,943
 
 
$
53,063
 

 
  



 



 



   Current income taxes payable as of
September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003 were approximately $13.6 million and $22.3 million, respectively. The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to significant portions of the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities for
continuing operations are as follows (in thousands):   












 
  
2004
 
 
2003
 

 Deferred tax assets:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Compensation related costs
  
$
23,810
 
 
$
16,246
 

 Insurance related costs
  
 
5,223
 
 
 
—  
 

 Inventories, principally due to additional costs inventoried for tax purposes
  
 
2,549
 
 
 
2,663
 

 Lease termination and other merger accruals
  
 
1,056
 
 
 
1,889
 

 Rent differential, principally due to financial reporting of pro rata expense
  
 
28,063
 
 
 
23,819
 

 Net domestic and international operating loss carryforwards
  
 
20,012
 
 
 
16,345
 

 Capital loss carryforwards
  
 
7,231
 
 
 
8,603
 

 Other
  
 
878
 
 
 
11
 

 
  



 




 Gross deferred tax assets
  
 
88,822
 
 
 
69,576
 

 Valuation allowance
  
 
(15,725
)
 
 
(8,603
)

 
  



 




 
  
 
73,097
 
 
 
60,973
 

 
  



 




 Deferred tax liabilities:
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Financial basis of fixed assets in excess of tax basis
  
 
(37,358
)
 
 
(25,326
)

 Capitalized costs expensed for tax purposes
  
 
(1,572
)
 
 
(1,536
)

 Other
  
 
—  
 
 
 
(626
)

 
  



 




 
  
 
(38,930
)
 
 
(27,488
)

 
  



 




 Net deferred tax asset
  
$
34,167
 
 
$
33,485
 

 
  



 



   Deferred taxes for continuing
operations have been classified on the consolidated balance sheets as follows:   










 
  
2004
  
2003

 Current assets
  
$
29,974
  
$
16,271

 Noncurrent assets
  
 
4,193
  
 
17,214

 
  


  



 Net deferred tax asset
  
$
34,167
  
$
33,485

 
  


  


   We have provided a valuation allowance
of approximately $15.7 million for deferred tax assets associated with international operating loss carrryforwards and capital loss carryforwards for which management has determined it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be
realized. The valuation allowance increased by approximately $7.1 million in fiscal year 2004 primarily due to current and acquired international loss carryforwards. As of September 26, 2004 we had domestic net operating loss carryforwards totaling
approximately $32 million that will expire in 2020, and international operating loss carryforwards totaling approximately $25 million, of which $9 million will expire in 2011 and $16 million have an indefinite life. Management believes that is more
likely than not that we will fully realize the remaining domestic deferred tax assets in the form of future tax deductions based on the nature of these deductible temporary differences and a history of profitable operations.   
46 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    (10)
Investments    We had short-term cash equivalent investments totaling
approximately $184.1 million and $162.0 million at September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, respectively. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, an unrealized loss of approximately $0.4 million and an unrealized gain of approximately $0.1
million, respectively, related to cash equivalent investments was included as a component of shareholders’ equity.    During fiscal year 2004, we sold all of our investments in Gaiam, Inc for approximately $1.8 million, resulting in a loss of approximately $0.5 million. Our investments
in Gaiam, Inc., a public company, consisted of 80,000 unrestricted common shares, which were classified as available-for-sale securities and 250,000 restricted common shares, for which we accounted using the cost method. During fiscal year 2003 we
recognized losses totaling approximately $1.4 million for other-than-temporary impairment of our unrestricted and restricted investments in Gaiam, Inc. common stock due to a sustained decline in market value of the stock below our carrying value.
This impairment charge was recorded to adjust our investments in Gaiam, Inc. to quoted market value. As of September 28, 2003 our unrestricted shares of Gaiam, Inc. had a carrying value and fair value of approximately $0.5 million and our restricted
shares of Gaiam, Inc. had an adjusted cost basis of approximately $1.7 million.    (11) Discontinued Operations    In November 2000, the Company
adopted a formal plan to sell the NatureSmart business of manufacturing and direct marketing of nutritional supplements. Accordingly, the NatureSmart business was accounted for and presented as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial
statements. During fiscal year 2002, we completed the sale of the facility in Thornton, Colorado that was used by NatureSmart for approximately $15 million in cash. During fiscal year 2003, we completed the sale of an undeveloped property in
Westminster, Colorado that was associated with discontinued operations for approximately $3.0 million in cash. At September 26, 2004, substantially all activities associated with discontinued operations have been completed.    (12) Shareholders’ Equity    Dividends    On November 12, 2003, the Company announced its first quarterly cash dividend. The first dividend of $0.15 per share, in the amount of $9.1
million, was paid on January 16, 2004 to shareholders of record as of January 6, 2004. The second divided of $0.15 per share, in the amount of $9.2 million, was paid on April 19, 2004 to shareholders of record as of April 9, 2004. The third dividend
of $0.15 per share, in the amount of $9.4 million, was paid on July 19, 2004 to shareholders of record as of July 9, 2004, and the fourth dividend of $0.15 per share, in the amount of $9.4 million, was paid on October 18, 2004 to shareholders of
record as of October 8, 2004. On November 10, 2004, the Company announced a 27% increase in its quarterly cash dividend to $0.19 per share. The first $0.19 per share dividend is payable on January 17, 2005 to shareholders of record as of January 7,
2005.    Treasury Stock    The Board of Directors has authorized the Company to repurchase up to $50 million in
outstanding shares of Company common stock. In fiscal year 2002, we reissued shares from treasury at average cost for certain options exercised. During fiscal year 2002, approximately 342,000 shares were reissued from treasury for a total of
approximately $5.4 million. At September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, we had no shares of Company common stock in treasury.     Preferred Stock Purchase Rights    In October, 1999, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a dividend of one-half Right to purchase preferred stock (“Right”) for each outstanding share
of Company common stock, and since that distribution, shares of Company common stock have been issued with accompanying Rights. Each Right entitles the registered holder to purchase from the Company a fractional share consisting of one
one-thousandth of a share of Series A Junior Participating Preferred Stock, par value $.01 per share, at a purchase price of $225 per fractional share, subject to adjustment. The Rights generally will not become exercisable until 10 days after a
public announcement that a person or group has acquired 15% or more of Company common stock (thereby becoming an “Acquiring Person”) or the commencement of a tender or exchange offer that would result in an   
47 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    Acquiring Person. Generally, if any person or group becomes an Acquiring Person, each right, other than Rights beneficially owned by the Acquiring Person (which will thereupon become void), will thereafter entitle its holder to purchase, at
the Rights’ then current exercise price, shares of our common stock having a market value of two times the exercise price of the Right. If, after there is an Acquiring Person, and the Company or a majority of its assets is acquired in certain
transactions, each Right not owned by an Acquiring Person will entitle its holder to purchase, at a discount, shares of common stock of the acquiring entity (or its parent) in the transaction. After there is an Acquiring Person, the Company’s
Board of Directors may, under certain circumstances, exchange shares of our common stock or other securities for each Right not held by an Acquiring Person. At any time until 10 days after a public announcement that the Rights have been triggered,
our Company will generally be entitled to redeem the Rights for $.01 and to amend the Rights in any manner. Certain subsequent amendments are also permitted. The Rights expire on September 22, 2009.    (13) Earnings per Share    The computation of basic earnings per share is based on the number of weighted average common shares outstanding during the period. The
computation of diluted earnings per share includes the dilutive effect of common stock equivalents consisting of common shares deemed outstanding from the assumed exercise of stock options and the assumed conversion of zero coupon convertible
subordinated debentures. A reconciliation of the numerators and denominators of the basic and diluted earnings per share calculations follows (in thousands):   













 
  
2004
  
2003
  
2002

 Net income (numerator for basic earnings per share)
  
$
129,512
  
$
98,915
  
$
79,594

 Interest on 5% zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures, net of income taxes
  
 
4,697
  
 
4,481
  
 
4,272

 
  


  


  



 Adjusted net income (numerator for diluted earnings per share)
  
$
134,209
  
$
103,396
  
$
83,866

 
  


  


  



 Weighted average common shares outstanding (denominator for basic earnings per share)
  
 
61,324
  
 
59,035
  
 
56,385

 Potential common shares outstanding:
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 Assumed conversion of 5% zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures
  
 
3,281
  
 
3,285
  
 
3,286

 Assumed exercise of stock options
  
 
3,122
  
 
3,010
  
 
3,669

 
  


  


  



 Weighted average common shares outstanding and potential additional common shares outstanding (denominator for diluted earnings per
share)
  
 
67,727
  
 
65,330
  
 
63,340

 
  


  


  



 Basic earnings per share
  
$
2.11
  
$
1.68
  
$
1.41

 
  


  


  



 Diluted earnings per share
  
$
1.98
  
$
1.58
  
$
1.32

 
  


  


  


   The computation of diluted earnings
per share does not include options to purchase approximately 3,000 shares, 1.2 million shares and 0.6 million shares of common stock at the end of fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively, because to do so would be antidilutive.    (14) Team Member Benefit Plans    Team Member Stock Option Plans    Our Company grants options to purchase common stock under our 1992 Stock Option Plans, as
amended. Under these plans, options are granted at an option price equal to the market value of the stock at the date of grant and are generally exercisable ratably over a four-year period beginning one year from date of grant. Options granted in
fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002 expire seven years from date of grant. Our Company has, in connection with certain of our business combinations, assumed the stock option plans of the acquired companies. All options outstanding under our
Company’s previous plans and plans assumed in business combinations continue to be governed by the terms and conditions of those grants. At September 26, 2004, September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002, approximately 5.6 million, 2.2 million
and 1.3 million shares of our   
48 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    common
stock, respectively, were available for future option grants. The following table summarizes option activity (in thousands, except per share data):   










 
  
 Number of OptionsOutstanding
 
 
WeightedAverageExercisePrice

 Balance at September 30, 2001
  
9,740
 
 
$
22.35

 Options granted
  
1,802
 
 
 
46.40

 Options exercised
  
(2,854
)
 
 
23.33

 Options canceled
  
(404
)
 
 
26.79

 
  


 



 Balance at September 29, 2002
  
8,284
 
 
$
27.04

 Options granted
  
2,188
 
 
 
55.60

 Options exercised
  
(2,230
)
 
 
22.62

 Options canceled
  
(378
)
 
 
27.79

 
  


 



 Balance at September 28, 2003
  
7,864
 
 
$
35.06

 Options granted
  
2,620
 
 
 
79.08

 Options exercised
  
(2,077
)
 
 
28.25

 Options canceled
  
(337
)
 
 
47.80

 
  


 



 Balance at September 26, 2004
  
8,070
 
 
$
51.38

 
  


 


   A summary of options outstanding and
exercisable at September 26, 2004 follows (in thousands, except per share data):   




















 
 
 
 
Options Outstanding
 
Options Exercisable

 Range of Exercise Prices
 
 Number Outstanding
 
 Weighted AverageRemaining Life (in Years)
 
 Weighted Average Exercise Price
 
 Number Exercisable
 
 WeightedAverage Exercise Price

From
 
To
 
 
 
 
 

$
0.45
 
$
20.94
 
944
 
2.04
 
$
18.45
 
940
 
$
18.44

 
20.94
 
 
43.53
 
1,653
 
2.92
 
 
25.89
 
1,040
 
 
27.02

 
43.53
 
 
53.00
 
1,170
 
4.57
 
 
46.94
 
393
 
 
46.85

 
53.00
 
 
76.61
 
1,769
 
5.52
 
 
55.79
 
303
 
 
55.64

 
76.61
 
 
84.12
 
2,534
 
6.61
 
 
79.26
 
—  
 
 
—  

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 


 

 



 
Total
 
 
 
 
8,070
 
4.78
 
$
51.38
 
2,676
 
$
30.18

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 


 

 


   At September 28, 2003 and September
29, 2002, approximately 2.8 million and 3.1 million outstanding options, respectively, were exercisable. The weighted average exercise price for outstanding exercisable options was $24.85 and $22.32 at September 28, 2003 and September 29, 2002,
respectively. The weighted average estimated fair values at grant date of team member stock options granted during fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002 were $29.37, $22.43 and $20.25, respectively.    Team Member Stock Purchase Plan    Our Company offers a team member stock purchase plan to all full-time team members with a
minimum of 400 hours of service. Under this plan, participating team members may purchase our common stock each fiscal quarter through payroll deductions. Participants in the stock purchase plan may elect to purchase unrestricted shares at 100
percent of market value or restricted shares at 85 percent of market value on the purchase date. Participants are required to hold restricted shares for two years before selling them. We issued approximately 16,000, 14,000 and 15,000 shares under
this plan in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively.    Team Member
401(k) Plan    Our Company offers a team member 401(k) plan to all team
members with a minimum of 1,000 service hours in one year. The Company did not make a matching contribution to the plan in fiscal year 2004. Matching contributions totaling approximately $3.1 million and $4.5 million in fiscal years 2003 and 2002,
respectively, were made in newly issued Company common stock totaling approximately 67,000 shares and 106,000 shares, respectively.   
49 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    (15)
Quarterly Results (unaudited)    The Company’s first quarter consists
of 16 weeks, and the second, third and fourth quarters consist of 12 weeks. Because the first quarter is longer than the remaining quarters, it typically represents a larger share of our annual sales from existing stores. Quarter to quarter
comparisons of results of operations have been and may be materially impacted by the timing of new store openings. The Company believes that the following information reflects all normal recurring adjustments necessary for a fair presentation of the
information for the periods presented. The operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period.    The following tables set forth selected quarterly unaudited consolidated statements of operations information for the fiscal years ended September 26, 2004 and September
28, 2003 (in thousands except per share data):   




















 
  
FirstQuarter
 
 
SecondQuarter
 
 
ThirdQuarter
 
 
FourthQuarter
 

 Fiscal Year 2004
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Sales
  
$
1,118,148
 
 
$
902,141
 
 
$
917,355
 
 
$
927,306
 

 Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs
  
 
733,721
 
 
 
582,597
 
 
 
600,961
 
 
 
606,537
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Gross profit
  
 
384,427
 
 
 
319,544
 
 
 
316,394
 
 
 
320,769
 

 Direct store expenses
  
 
282,596
 
 
 
229,995
 
 
 
232,649
 
 
 
240,800
 

 General and administrative expenses
  
 
35,869
 
 
 
28,783
 
 
 
27,551
 
 
 
27,597
 

 Pre-opening and relocation costs
  
 
4,073
 
 
 
4,040
 
 
 
4,966
 
 
 
5,569
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Operating income
  
 
61,889
 
 
 
56,726
 
 
 
51,228
 
 
 
46,803
 

 Other income (expense)
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Interest expense
  
 
(2,478
)
 
 
(1,859
)
 
 
(1,319
)
 
 
(1,593
)

 Investment and other income
  
 
1,464
 
 
 
1,503
 
 
 
1,782
 
 
 
1,707
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Income before income taxes
  
 
60,875
 
 
 
56,370
 
 
 
51,691
 
 
 
46,917
 

 Provision for income taxes
  
 
24,350
 
 
 
22,548
 
 
 
20,676
 
 
 
18,767
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Net income
  
$
36,525
 
 
$
33,822
 
 
$
31,015
 
 
$
28,150
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Basic earnings per share
  
$
0.61
 
 
$
0.55
 
 
$
0.50
 
 
$
0.45
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Diluted earnings per share
  
$
0.57
 
 
$
0.52
 
 
$
0.47
 
 
$
0.43
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Dividends per share
  
$
0.15
 
 
$
0.15
 
 
$
0.15
 
 
$
0.15
 

 
  



 



 



 










 
  
FirstQuarter
 
 
SecondQuarter
 
 
ThirdQuarter
 
 
FourthQuarter
 

 Fiscal Year 2003
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Sales
  
$
923,760
 
 
$
725,139
 
 
$
749,043
 
 
$
750,651
 

 Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs
  
 
609,889
 
 
 
475,674
 
 
 
490,982
 
 
 
493,789
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Gross profit
  
 
313,871
 
 
 
249,465
 
 
 
258,061
 
 
 
256,862
 

 Direct store expenses
  
 
234,131
 
 
 
181,329
 
 
 
187,358
 
 
 
191,604
 

 General and administrative expenses
  
 
31,176
 
 
 
23,289
 
 
 
23,930
 
 
 
22,298
 

 Pre-opening and relocation costs
  
 
5,161
 
 
 
2,352
 
 
 
3,252
 
 
 
5,000
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Operating income
  
 
43,403
 
 
 
42,495
 
 
 
43,521
 
 
 
37,960
 

 Other income (expense)
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Interest expense
  
 
(2,565
)
 
 
(2,021
)
 
 
(1,907
)
 
 
(1,621
)

 Investment and other income (expense)
  
 
(720
)
 
 
817
 
 
 
4,292
 
 
 
1,204
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Income before income taxes
  
 
40,118
 
 
 
41,291
 
 
 
45,906
 
 
 
37,543
 

 Provision for income taxes
  
 
16,047
 
 
 
16,516
 
 
 
18,362
 
 
 
15,018
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Net income
  
$
24,071
 
 
$
24,775
 
 
$
27,544
 
 
$
22,525
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Basic earnings per share
  
$
0.41
 
 
$
0.42
 
 
$
0.46
 
 
$
0.38
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Diluted earnings per share
  
$
0.39
 
 
$
0.40
 
 
$
0.43
 
 
$
0.36
 

 
  



 



 



 




 Dividends per share
  
$
—  
 
 
$
—  
 
 
$
—  
 
 
$
—  
 

 
  



 



 



 



  
50 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Whole Foods Market, Inc.  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)    (16)
Commitments and Contingencies    The Company uses a combination of insurance
and self-insurance plans to provide for the potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability, property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability and employee health care benefits.
Liabilities associated with the risks that are retained by the Company are estimated, in part, by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial assumptions. While we believe that our assumptions
are appropriate, the estimated accruals for these liabilities could be significantly affected if future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical trends.    From time to time we are party to legal proceedings including matters involving personnel and employment issues, personal injury,
intellectual property and other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. Although not currently anticipated by management, our results could be materially impacted by the decisions and expenses related to pending or future
proceedings.    The Company has entered into Retention Agreements with certain
executive officers of the Company or its subsidiaries which provide for certain benefits upon an involuntary termination of employment other than for cause after a “Triggering Event.” A Triggering Event includes a merger of the Company
with and into an unaffiliated corporation if the Company is not the surviving corporation or the sale of all or substantially all of the Company’s assets. The benefits to be received by the executive officer whose employment is terminated after
a Triggering Event occurs include receipt of his or her annual salary through the one-year period following the date of the termination of employment and the immediate vesting of any outstanding stock options granted to such executive officer.
  
51 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.    None.    
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures.    Management,
with the participation of the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the Company, has evaluated any changes in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the most recent fiscal quarter. Based on
that evaluation, management, the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of the Company have concluded that there were no changes in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting during the most recent fiscal quarter
that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.    On February 24, 2005, management of the Company discussed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company (the “Audit Committee”) the views
expressed by the Office of the Chief Accountant of the SEC on February 7, 2005 regarding certain operating lease accounting issues and their application under GAAP. At such meeting, management advised the Audit Committee that it had made a
preliminary determination, similar to recent determinations by many other publicly-held retail and restaurant companies, that its current methods of accounting for rent holidays and tenant improvement allowances, and of determining lives used in the
calculation of depreciation of leasehold improvements and straight-line rent determination for certain leased properties, were not consistent with the views expressed by the SEC staff letter and other recent interpretations.    Because the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the first quarter of fiscal 2005
was due on February 25, 2005, management recommended filing a Form 12b-25 with the SEC for a five-day extension on the due date of the 10-Q in order to give management time to incorporate the correct accounting for these items into the 10-Q and to
give the Audit Committee and the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm time to review the filing. The Audit Committee concurred with this recommendation. On February 25, 2005, the Company filed the Form 12b-25 and a Current
Report on Form 8-K to report the filing extension.    On March 1, 2005,
management and the Audit Committee, in consultation with the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, discussed the above-described operating lease accounting issues, and the Audit Committee concurred with management’s
assessment that the Company’s accounting for these items was incorrect and that the Company’s previously issued audited consolidated financial statements for fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002 and the unaudited comparative 2004 and 2003
quarterly information should be restated.    Restatement of previously issued
financial statements to reflect the correction of misstatement is a strong indicator of the existence of a material weakness in internal control over financial reporting as defined in the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board’s Auditing
Standard No. 2, “An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Performed in Conjunction With an Audit of Financial Statements.” In light of the determination that previously issued financial statements should be restated,
management concluded that a material weakness existed in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting and disclosed this matter to the Audit Committee and to the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm.
   The Company maintains disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to
ensure that information required to be disclosed in its reports filed pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the Securities and Exchange
Commission’s rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to the Company’s management, including its Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding
required disclosure. Management, with the participation of the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the Company, has performed an evaluation of the design and operation of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures as of
the end of the period covered by this Report. Based on that evaluation, which included the matters discussed above, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the Company concluded that the Company’s disclosure controls and
procedures were not effective as of the end of the period covered by this Report.    The Company has remediated the material weakness in internal control over financial reporting by evaluating its lease accounting methods, and correcting its methods of accounting for rent holidays and tenant improvement allowances, and of
determining lives used in the calculation of depreciation of leasehold improvements and straight-line rent determination for certain leased properties.   
52 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires the Company’s management to provide an assessment of the
effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of the end of fiscal year 2005. The Company is in the process of performing the system and process documentation, evaluation and testing necessary to make its
assessment. The Company has not completed this process or its assessment. In the process of evaluation and testing, the Company may identify deficiencies that will require remediation.    
Item 9B. Other Information.    Not applicable.
  
53 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

PART III    
Item 10. Directors and Executive Officers of the Registrant.    Directors and Executive Officers    David W. Dupree, 51, has served as director of the Company since August 1996. Since 1999, Mr. Dupree has been a Managing Director of The Halifax Group, a limited partnership founded to pursue small and mid-cap investment
opportunities. Mr. Dupree also serves on the board of Insight Health Services Corp.    Dr. John B. Elstrott, 56, has served as a director of the Company since February 1995. Dr. Elstrott is a Clinical Professor of Entrepreneurship and the founding director of the Levy-Rosenblum Institute for Entrepreneurship at Tulane
University’s Freeman School of Business, which was started in 1991. He has been on the faculty at Tulane since 1982. Mr. Elstrott also serves on the board of Spectrum Organic Products, Inc.    Avram J. Goldberg, 75, has served as a director of the Company since May 1994. Mr.
Goldberg has been the Chairman of the Board of AVCAR Group, Ltd., a consulting firm specializing in the retail industry, since 1989. Previously, he served as Chairman and CEO of The Stop & Shop Companies, Inc., a major supermarket and retail
general merchandise company.    Gabrielle E. Greene, 44, has served as
director of the Company since September 2003. Since January 2002, Ms. Greene has served as Chief Financial Officer of the Villanueva Companies, a private holding company with diverse investment interests. From August 2000 until January 2002, Ms.
Greene served as CFO of Crown Services, a construction services company. From January 1998 until August 2000, Ms. Greene was a partner in BE/Greenwich Street Capital, a private equity firm.    John P. Mackey, 51, co-founder of the Company, has served as Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer since 1980. Mr. Mackey also served as President from June 2001 to October 2004.    Linda A. Mason, 50, has served as a director of the Company since March 2002. Ms. Mason is co-founder and Chairman of the Board of Bright Horizons Family Solutions, the world’s leading provider of employer
sponsored child care, early education and work/life solutions. Ms. Mason served as President of Bright Horizons from 1986 until becoming Chairman in July 1998. Ms. Mason previously served as a director of the Company from July 1992 until January
2000 when she resigned due to other business commitments.    Morris J.
Siegel, 55, has served as director of the Company since September 2003. Mr. Siegel is currently self-employed, operating Capitol Peaks, an investment firm. Mr. Siegel was the co-founder of Celestial Seasonings, Inc. serving as Chairman and CEO
from 1970 until 2002. Celestial Seasonings merged with The Hain Food Group forming The Hain Celestial Group of which Mr. Siegel served as Vice Chairman from 2000 until retiring in 2002. Mr. Siegel also serves on the board of CNS Pharmaceutical
Company.    Dr. Ralph Z. Sorenson, 71, has served as a director of the
Company since December 1994. Dr. Sorenson is Managing Partner of the Sorenson Limited Partnership, a venture investment partnership. Dr. Sorenson is President Emeritus of Babson College and Professor Emeritus and former Dean of the University of
Colorado College of Business Administration. Dr. Sorenson also serves as a director of Eaton Vance Corp.    For information about executive officers of the Company as of November 30, 2004, see “Item 1. Business. – Executive Officers and Regional Presidents.”    The Company’s Board of Directors has determined that all Audit Committee members are
financial experts. The Audit Committee consists of David W. Dupree, Dr. John B. Elstrott, Avram J. Goldberg and Gabrielle E. Greene.    The Company has adopted a Code of Conduct and Ethics for Team Members and Directors pursuant to section 406 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. A copy of our Code of Conduct and
Ethics is publicly available on our Company website at http://www.wholefoodsmarket.com/investor/codeofconduct.pdf.    Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance    Based solely upon a review of Forms 3, 4 and 5 furnished to the Company, the Company believes that all of its directors, officers and applicable shareholders timely filed
these reports except for the late reporting of the following: Lee Valkenaar was late reporting a 12,000 share option grant issued September 2004. David Dupree was late reporting a purchase of   
54 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
1,250 shares in August 2004, Anthony Gilmore was late reporting a sale of 230 shares in June 2004 and David Lannon was
late reporting a sale of 186 shares in May 2004. The Company believes all other transactions required to be reported during fiscal year 2004 were reported on a timely basis.    
Item 11. Executive Compensation.    Summary of
Executive Compensation    The following table includes information
concerning compensation for the three-year period ended September 26, 2004 in reference to our Chief Executive Officer and the other four most highly compensated executive officers of the Company.   

















 Name and Principal
Position
  
Year
  
Salary (1)
  
Bonus (1)
  
OtherCompensation (2)
  
StockOptionsGranted

 John P. Mackey  Chairman of the Board and  Chief Executive Officer
  
200420032002
  
$  
342,000326,000302,000
  
$  
118,000114,000278,000
  
$  
—  —  4,891
  
13,7508,0004,000








 Glenda Flanagan  Executive Vice President and  Chief Financial Officer
  
200420032002
  
   
277,000264,000245,000
  
   
128,00094,000223,000
  
   
—  —  4,127
  
11,5008,0004,000








 A. C. Gallo  Co-President and Chief  Operating Officer
  
200420032002
  
   
296,000282,000261,000
  
   
88,000104,000174,000
  
   
—  —  3,815
  
13,0008,0004,000








 Walter Robb  Co-President and Chief  Operating Officer
  
200420032002
  
   
296,000282,000261,000
  
   
163,00085,000201,000
  
   
—  —  5,711
  
13,6508,0004,000








 James P. Sud  Executive Vice President of Growth and Business Development
  
200420032002
  
   
277,000264,000245,000
  
   
128,00094,000223,000
  
   
—  —  —  
  
11,5008,0004,000

 
  

  


  


  


  




(1)
We have a policy that limits the cash compensation paid to any officer in the calendar year to fourteen times the average salary of all full time Team Members. For 2004, this salary
cap was approximately $427,000. In the rare instances in which total amounts earned exceed the salary cap, the excess is deferred to the following year; however, 2004 is the last year in which such deferral is permitted by our policy. Salary and
bonus amounts actually received by named officers during the year may be more or less than amounts shown above due to payment of amounts earned and deferred in prior years, officers electing to take time-off without pay, and deferral of amounts due
to salary cap limitations. Total cash compensation amounts actually paid during 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively, were as follows: Mr. Mackey, $368,000, $409,000 and $331,000; Ms. Flanagan, $366,000, $406,000 and $191,000; Mr. Gallo, $384,000,
$386,000 and $376,000; Mr. Robb, $426,000, $409,000 and $389,000; and Mr. Sud, $380,000, $357,000 and $371,000. 


(2)
Except as otherwise indicated, the amounts reflect our contributions on behalf of the persons indicated to the Whole Foods Market 401(k) plans.    Retention Agreements    Since November 1991, the Company has entered into Retention Agreements with certain executive officers of the Company or its subsidiaries
which provide for certain benefits upon an involuntary termination of employment other than for cause after a “Triggering Event.” A Triggering Event includes a merger of the Company with and into an unaffiliated corporation if the Company
is not the surviving corporation or the sale of all or substantially all of the Company’s assets. The benefits to be received by the executive officer whose employment is terminated after a Triggering Event occurs include receipt of his or her
annual salary through the one-year period following the date of the termination of employment and the immediate vesting of any outstanding stock options granted to such executive officer.   
55 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Stock Options    The following table sets forth certain information with respect to the options granted during or for the fiscal year ended September 26, 2004 to each of our executive
officers listed in the Summary Compensation Table as shown under the caption “Executive Compensation.”   




















 Name
  
Number ofOptionsGranted
  
Total OptionsGranted toEmployees inFiscal Year
 
 
 Exercise orBase Price in Dollarsper Share (2)
  
ExpirationDate
  
Potential Realizable Value atAssumed Annual Rates of Stock PriceAppreciation for Option Term (1)

  
  
 
  
  
5 %
  
10 %

 John P. Mackey
  
3,0006,0004,750
  
(3(3(3
)))
 
$  
59.7579.2282.09
  
11/06/201005/06/201110/22/2011
  
$  
72,973193,503158,740
  
$  
170,058450,944369,931









 Glenda Flanagan
  
3,0006,0002,500
  
(3(3(3
)))
 
   
59.7579.2282.09
  
11/06/201005/06/201110/22/2011
  
   
72,973193,50383,547
  
   
170,058450,944194,700









 A.C. Gallo
  
3,0006,0004,000
  
(3(3(3
)))
 
   
59.7579.2282.09
  
11/06/201005/06/201110/22/2011
  
   
72,973193,503133,676
  
   
170,058450,944311,521









 Walter Robb
  
3,0006,0004,650
  
(3(3(3
)))
 
   
59.7579.2282.09
  
11/06/201005/06/201110/22/2011
  
   
72,973193,503152,934
  
   
170,058450,944356,402









 James P. Sud
  
3,0006,0002,500
  
(3(3(3
)))
 
   
59.7579.2282.09
  
11/06/201005/06/201110/22/2011
  
   
72,973193,50383,547
  
   
170,058450,944194,700

 
  

  


 


  

  


  





(1)
The 5% and 10% assumed annual rates of appreciation are mandated by the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission and do not reflect our estimates or projections of future
prices of the shares of our common stock. There can be no assurance that the amounts reflected in this table will be achieved. 


(2)
Closing price of common stock at date of grant. 


(3)
Less than 1%.    The following table includes certain information with respect to the options exercised or held by the executive officers named above during the year ended September 26, 2004. The number of options held at September
26, 2004 includes options granted under the 1992 Option Plan for Team Members.   



















 Name
  
SharesAcquiredon Exercise
  
ValueRealized (1)
  
Number of SecuritiesUnderlying UnexercisedOptions at September 26, 2004
  
 Value of Unexercised In-the-Money Options (2) at September 26, 2004

  
  
  
Exercisable
  
Unexercisable
  
Exercisable
  
Unexercisable

 John P. Mackey
  
18,540
  
$
1,013,893
  
62,000
  
19,000
  
$
3,878,600
  
$
492,135

 Glenda Flanagan
  
36,000
  
 
1,844,770
  
42,000
  
19,000
  
 
2,592,125
  
 
492,135

 A.C. Gallo
  
7,686
  
 
447,016
  
31,752
  
25,000
  
 
1,885,836
  
 
863,265

 Walter Robb
  
7,350
  
 
418,387
  
47,050
  
24,750
  
 
2,753,036
  
 
847,801

 James P. Sud
  
31,200
  
 
1,781,800
  
34,000
  
19,000
  
 
1,968,285
  
 
492,135

 
  

  


  

  

  


  





(1)
Of shares exercised, the following amounts were due to options expiring during the fiscal year: Mr. Mackey, 18,540 shares; Ms. Flanagan, 36,000 shares; Mr. Robb, 3,850 shares; and
Mr. Sud, 28,000 shares. 


(2)
Based upon the market price received for the underlying shares of common stock of Whole Foods Market received upon exercise and the option exercise price. 


(3)
Based upon the closing price of the common stock of Whole Foods Market on September 24, 2004 ($84.73 per share) and the exercise price of the options.   
56 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Compensation of Directors    Each of our non-employee directors receives $4,515 for each Board of Directors’ meeting attended and $2,258 for attendance via
telephone. For each telephone Board meeting which is between one to two hours in length and in which a majority of directors participate, a $827 fee is paid. For each telephone Board meeting greater than two hours, a $1,050 fee is paid. Each Board
Committee Chair receives a quarterly retainer of $1,313. Each committee member receives $827 for each Board Committee meeting attended in conjunction with a Board meeting, and $3,308 for each Board Committee meeting attended in person apart from a
Board meeting. The Lead Director and the Mergers and Acquisitions Director, both of whom are selected annually by the Board of Directors, are paid quarterly retainers of $8,269 and $1,575 respectively. All directors are paid a quarterly retainer of
$2,500.    In addition, directors are reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred
in attending Board of Directors’ meetings. None of the non-employee directors received any compensation from the Company other than as described above. Mr. Mackey, who is the only director who is also an employee of the Company, is not a member
of any Board committees and does not receive any additional compensation for serving on the Board of Directors.    Under our option plan for outside directors, each newly elected director receives as of the date of his or her initial election or appointment to the Board an option to
purchase 10,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price equal to the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. If incumbent directors have attended at least two-thirds of the meetings of our Board of Directors held in the
preceding year, they each receive an annual grant at an exercise price equal to the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. In 2004 the option grant was 3,000 shares per director, granted on May 6, 2004.    Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation    No member of our Board’s Compensation Committee has served as one of our officers or
employees at any time. None of our executive officers serve as a member of the compensation committee of any other company that has an executive officer serving as a member of our Board of Directors. None of our executive officers serve as a member
of the board of directors of any other company that has an executive officer serving as a member of our Board’s Compensation Committee.    
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management.    The following table presents the beneficial ownership of our common stock as of November 23, 2004, except as noted, for (i) each person beneficially owning more than 5% of the outstanding shares of our common stock,
(ii) each director of the Company, (iii) each executive officer of the Company listed in the Summary Compensation Table and (iv) all of our directors and officers as a group. Except pursuant to applicable community property laws and except as
otherwise indicated, each shareholder possesses sole voting and investment power with respect to its or his shares.   









 
  
Shares Owned (1)
 

 Name
  
Number
  
Percent
 

 Jennison Associates LLC. (2)
  
6,386,081
  
10
%

 FMR Corp. (3)
  
5,808,697
  
9
%

 W.P. Stewart & Co. Ltd. (4)
  
3,448,695
  
5
%

 David W. Dupree
  
28,950
  
*
 

 Dr. John B. Elstrott
  
20,650
  
*
 

 Glenda Flanagan
  
97,974
  
*
 

 A.C. Gallo
  
37,004
  
*
 

 Avram J. Goldberg
  
29,750
  
*
 

 Gabrielle E. Greene
  
2,532
  
*
 

 John P. Mackey
  
638,359
  
1
%

 Linda Mason
  
10,250
  
*
 

 Walter Robb
  
60,057
  
*
 

 Morris J. Siegel
  
2,500
  
*
 

 Dr. Ralph Z. Sorenson
  
26,750
  
*
 

 James P. Sud
  
100,476
  
*
 

 All 23 directors and officers as a group
  
1,227,780
  
2
%

 
  

  


  
57 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements



*
Indicates ownership of less than 1% of the outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock. 


(1)
Shares issuable upon exercise of stock options that are exercisable within 60 days after November 23, 2004, are treated as beneficially owned as follows: Mr. Dupree, 21,504; Mr.
Elstrott, 9,750; Ms. Flanagan, 43,250; Mr. Gallo, 33,002; Mr. Goldberg, 20,750; Ms. Greene, 2,500; Mr. Mackey, 63,250; Ms. Mason, 5,750; Mr. Robb, 43,208; Mr. Siegel, 2,500; Mr. Sorenson, 16,750; Mr. Sud, 33,250; and all directors and executive
officers as a group, 454,862. 


(2)
Based on information contained in Schedule 13G, as filed on October 31, 2004. The address of such shareholder is 466 Lexington Avenue, 18th floor, New York, New York 10017-3151. 


(3)
Based on information contained in Schedule 13F, as filed on September 30, 2004. The address of such shareholder is 82 Devonshire Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02109-3614.



(4)
Based on information contained in Schedule 13F, as filed on September 30, 2004. The address of such shareholder is 527 Madison Avenue 20th floor, New York, New York 10022-4304.
   For information about our Company’s securities authorized
for issuance under equity compensation plans as of September 26, 2004 see “Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.”    
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions.    John P. Mackey and Glenda Flanagan, executive officers of the Company, own approximately 51% and 2%, respectively, of BookPeople, Inc., a retailer of books and periodicals that is unaffiliated with the Company, which leases retail space in
Austin, Texas from the Company. The lease provides for an aggregate annual minimum rent of approximately $0.4 million which the Company received in rental income in fiscal years 2004, 2003 and 2002. The Company expects to assign the rights
associated with this lease during fiscal year 2005 in connection with the relocation of its corporate headquarters.    During fiscal year 2004, the Company acquired all of the outstanding stock of Fresh & Wild, which owned and operated seven natural and organic food stores in London
and Bristol, England for a total of approximately $20 million in cash and approximately $16 million in Company common stock. John P. Mackey and Walter Robb, executive officers of the Company, each owned approximately 0.2% of the outstanding stock of
Fresh & Wild and received proceeds totaling approximately $54,000 and $78,000, respectively, as consideration for their ownership interest.    
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services.    The following table presents fees for professional audit services rendered by Ernst & Young LLP for the audit of the Company’s annual financial statements for the years ended September 26, 2004 and September 28, 2003, and fees for
other services rendered by Ernst & Young LLP during those periods (in thousands):   










 
  
2004
  
2003

 Audit fees
  
$
351
  
$
292

 Audit-related fees
  
 
51
  
 
41

 Tax fees
  
 
15
  
 
64

 All other fees
  
 
55
  
 
78

 
  


  



 Total
  
$
472
  
$
475

 
  


  


   Services rendered by Ernst & Young
in connection with fees presented above were as follows:    Audit Fees
   Annual audit fees relate to services rendered in connection with the
audit of the Company’s consolidated financial statements, the quarterly reviews of financial statements included in the Company’s Forms 10-Q and consents included in other SEC filings.    Audit-Related Fees    Audit-related services include fees for benefit plan audits and consultation on accounting
standards or transactions.    Tax Fees    Tax services include fees for tax compliance, tax advice, tax planning and tax preparation
of Forms 5500 and expatriate returns.   
58 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
All Other Fees    All other services include fees for internal control documentation assistance pursuant to the requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and certification of
price paid for green coffee at our coffee roasting facility.    The Audit
Committee considers whether the provision of these services is compatible with maintaining the auditor’s independence, and has determined such services for fiscal years 2004 and 2003 were compatible.    Policy on Audit Committee Pre-Approval of Audit and Non-Audit Services of Independent
Auditor    The Audit Committee is responsible for appointing, setting
compensation and overseeing the work of the independent auditor. The Audit Committee has established a policy regarding pre-approval of all audit and non-audit services provided by the independent auditor. On an ongoing basis, management
communicates specific projects and categories of service for which the advance approval of the Audit Committee is requested. The Audit Committee reviews these requests and advises management if the Committee approves the engagement of the
independent auditor. On a periodic basis, management reports to the Audit Committee regarding the actual spending for such projects and services compared to the approved amounts.     
59 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

PART IV    
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.   








(a)
  
The following documents are filed as part of this report:





 
  
(1)
  
Consolidated Financial Statements: See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.





 
  
(2)
  
Financial Statement Schedules: No schedules are required.





 
  
(3)
  
Exhibits are incorporated herein by reference or are filed with this report as indicated below




(b)
  
Exhibits





 
  
3.1
  
Restated Articles of Incorporation of the Registrant, as amended (7)

 
  
3.2
  
By-laws of the Registrant adopted May 23, 1995, as amended (7)

 
  
4.1
  
Form of Zero Coupon Convertible Subordinated Debentures Due 2018 (3)

 
  
4.2
  
Indentures between the Company and Chase Bank of Texas, National Association, as Trustee (3)

 
  
4.3
  
Shareholder Rights Agreement, dated September 22, 1999, between the Registrant, Whole Foods Market, Inc. and Securities Transfer Corporation (5)

 
  
10.1
  
1993 Team Member Stock Ownership Plan (1)

 
  
10.2
  
Form of Retention Agreement between the executive officers of the Registrant and the Registrant (2)

 
  
10.3
  
Form of amendment to Retention Agreement (1)

 
  
10.4
  
Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated October 1, 2004, by and among Registrant, the subsidiaries of the Registrant, JPMorgan Chase Bank, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association,
Wachovia Bank, National Association, and Fleet National Bank, Standard Federal Bank, National Association, US Bank, National Association (6)

 
  
10.5
  
1992 Stock Option Plan for Team Members, as amended (1)

 
  
10.6
  
1992 Stock Option Plan for Outside Directors (1)

 
  
10.7
  
1993 Team Member Stock Purchase Plan (1)

 
  
10.8
  
Second Amended and Restated 1991 Stock Incentive Plan of Fresh Fields Markets, Inc. with amendments thereto (4)

 
  
10.9
  
Fresh Fields Markets, Inc.1994 Director Stock Option Plan with amendments thereto (4)

 
  
12.1
  
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges (8)

 
  
21.1
  
Subsidiaries of the Registrant (8)

 
  
23.1
  
Consent of Ernst & Young LLP (8)

 
  
31.1
  
Certification by Chief Executive Officer required by Rule 13a-14(a) (8)

 
  
31.2
  
Certification by Chief Financial Officer required by Rule 13a-14(a) (8)

 
  
32.1
  
Certification by Chief Executive Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes - Oxley Act of 2002 (8)

 
  
32.2
  
Certification by Chief Financial Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes - Oxley Act of 2002 (8)







(1)
  
Filed as an exhibit to Registration Statement on Form S-4 (No. 33-63824) and incorporated herein by reference.

(2)
  
Filed as an exhibit to Registration Statement on Form S-1 (No. 33-44214) and incorporated herein by reference.

(3)
  
Filed as an exhibit to Registration Statement on Form S-3 filed April 30, 1998 (No. 333-51419) and incorporated herein by reference.

(4)
  
Filed as an exhibit to Registration Statement on Form S-8 filed August 30, 1996 (No. 333-11271) and incorporated herein by reference.

(5)
  
Filed as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 8-K filed September 28, 1999 (No. 033-44214) and incorporated herein by reference.

(6)
  
Filed as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 8-K filed October 10, 2004 (No. 000-19797) and incorporated herein by reference.

(7)
  
Filed as an exhibit to Registrant’s Form 10-K for the year ended September 28, 2003 filed December 23, 2003 (No. 000-19797) and incorporated herein by reference.

(8)
  
Filed herewith.
    
60 


Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements

SIGNATURES    Pursuant to the requirements of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.    WHOLE FOODS MARKET, INC.   








Date: March 7, 2005
 
By:
 
 /s/ Glenda Flanagan

 
 
 
 
Glenda Flanagan

 
 
 
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
   Pursuant to the requirements of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on March 7, 2005.   






 Name
  
 Title

 /s/ John P. Mackey John P. Mackey
  
 Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and Director (Principal Executive Officer)




 /s/ Glenda Flanagan Glenda Flanagan
  
 Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)

 
  
 

 /s/ David W. Dupree
  
Director

David W. Dupree
  
 




 /s/ Dr. John B. Elstrott
  
Director

Dr. John B. Elstrott
  
 




 /s/ Avram J. Goldberg
  
Director

Avram J. Goldberg
  
 




 /s/ Gabrielle E. Greene
  
Director

Gabrielle E. Greene
  
 




 /s/ Linda A. Mason
  
Director

Linda A. Mason
  
 




 /s/ Morris J. Siegel
  
Director

Morris J. Siegel
  
 




 /s/ Dr. Ralph Z. Sorenson
  
Director

Dr. Ralph Z. Sorenson
  
 
  
61 


